PRELIMINARY PRINT

             Volume 600 U. S. Part 1
                              Pages 66–121




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                    OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                               June 27, 2023


Page Proof Pending Publication


                   REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D.C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
66                      OCTOBER TERM, 2022

                                 Syllabus


                COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

     certiorari to the court of appeals of colorado
       No. 22–138. Argued April 19, 2023—Decided June 27, 2023
From 2014 to 2016, petitioner Billy Counterman sent hundreds of Face-
  book messages to C. W., a local singer and musician. The two had never
  met, and C. W. did not respond. In fact, she tried repeatedly to block
  him, but each time, Counterman created a new Facebook account and
  resumed contacting C. W. Several of his messages envisaged violent
  harm befalling her. Counterman's messages put C. W. in fear and up-
  ended her daily existence: C. W. stopped walking alone, declined social
  engagements, and canceled some of her performances. C. W. eventually
  contacted the authorities. The State charged Counterman under a Col-
  orado statute making it unlawful to “[r]epeatedly . . . make[ ] any form
  of communication with another person” in “a manner that would cause
  a reasonable person to suffer serious emotional distress and does cause
  that person . . . to suffer serious emotional distress.” Colo. Rev. Stat.
  § 18–3–602(1)(c). Counterman moved to dismiss the charge on First
Page Proof Pending Publication
  Amendment grounds, arguing that his messages were not “true threats”
  and therefore could not form the basis of a criminal prosecution. Fol-
  lowing Colorado law, the trial court rejected that argument under an
  objective standard, fnding that a reasonable person would consider the
  messages threatening. Counterman appealed, arguing that the First
  Amendment required the State to show not only that his statements
  were objectively threatening, but also that he was aware of their threat-
  ening character. The Colorado Court of Appeals disagreed and af-
  frmed his conviction. The Colorado Supreme Court denied review.
Held: The State must prove in true-threats cases that the defendant had
 some subjective understanding of his statements' threatening nature,
 but the First Amendment requires no more demanding a showing than
 recklessness. Pp. 72–83.
    (a) The First Amendment permits restrictions upon the content of
 speech in a few limited areas. Among these historic and traditional
 categories of unprotected expression is true threats. True threats are
 “serious expression[s]” conveying that a speaker means to “commit an
 act of unlawful violence.” Virginia v. Black, 538 U. S. 343, 359. The
 existence of a threat depends not on “the mental state of the author,”
 but on “what the statement conveys” to the person on the receiving end.
 Elonis v. United States, 575 U. S. 723, 733. Yet the First Amendment
 may still demand a subjective mental-state requirement shielding some
                       Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                      67

                                Syllabus

 true threats from liability. That is because bans on speech have the
 potential to chill, or deter, speech outside their boundaries. An impor-
 tant tool to prevent that outcome is to condition liability on the State's
 showing of a culpable mental state. Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513,
 526. That kind of “strategic protection” features in this Court's prece-
 dent concerning the most prominent categories of unprotected speech.
 Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 342. With regard to defama-
 tion, a public fgure cannot recover for the injury such a statement
 causes unless the speaker acted with “knowledge that it was false or
 with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.” New York
 Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 280. The same idea arises in the
 law respecting obscenity and incitement to unlawful conduct. See, e. g.,
 Hess v. Indiana, 414 U. S. 105, 109; Hamling v. United States, 418 U. S.
 87, 122–123. And that same reasoning counsels in favor of requiring a
 subjective element in a true-threats case. A speaker's fear of mistak-
 ing whether a statement is a threat, fear of the legal system getting
 that judgment wrong, and fear of incurring legal costs all may lead a
 speaker to swallow words that are in fact not true threats. Insistence
 on a subjective element in unprotected-speech cases, no doubt, has a
 cost: Even as it lessens chill of protected speech, it makes prosecution
 of otherwise proscribable, and often dangerous, communications harder.
Page Proof Pending Publication
 But a subjective standard is still required for true threats, lest prosecu-
 tions chill too much protected, non-threatening expression. Pp. 73–78.
    (b) In this context, a recklessness standard—i. e., a showing that a
 person “consciously disregard[ed] a substantial [and unjustifable] risk
 that [his] conduct will cause harm to another,” Voisine v. United States,
 579 U. S. 686, 691—is the appropriate mens rea. Requiring purpose or
 knowledge would make it harder for States to counter true threats—
 with diminished returns for protected expression. Using a reckless-
 ness standard also fts with this Court's defamation decisions, which
 adopted a recklessness rule more than a half-century ago. The Court
 sees no reason to offer greater insulation to threats than to defamation.
 While this Court's incitement decisions demand more, the reason for
 that demand—the need to protect from legal sanction the political advo-
 cacy a hair's-breadth away from incitement—is not present here. For
 true threats, recklessness strikes the right balance, offering “enough
 `breathing space' for protected speech,” without sacrifcing too many of
 the benefts of enforcing laws against true threats. Elonis, 575 U. S.,
 at 748. Pp. 78–82.
    (c) The State prosecuted Counterman in accordance with an objective
 standard and did not have to show any awareness on Counterman's part
 of his statements' threatening character. That is a violation of the
 First Amendment. Pp. 82–83.
68                 COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                                Syllabus

497 P. 3d 1039, vacated and remanded.

  Kagan, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Roberts, C. J.,
and Alito, Kavanaugh, and Jackson, JJ., joined. Sotomayor, J., fled
an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which
Gorsuch, J., joined as to Parts I, II, III–A, and III–B, post, p. 83.
Thomas, J., fled a dissenting opinion, post, p. 105. Barrett, J., fled a
dissenting opinion, in which Thomas, J., joined, post, p. 106.

   John P. Elwood argued the cause for petitioner. With
him on the briefs were Anthony J. Franze, Kolya D. Glick,
William T. Sharon, and Mackenzie Shields.
   Philip J. Weiser, Attorney General of Colorado, argued the
cause for respondent. With him on the brief were Eric R.
Olson, Solicitor General, Jillian J. Price, Deputy Attorney
General, Joseph G. Michaels, Assistant Solicitor General,
Helen Norton, Special Assistant Attorney General, and
Talia Kraemer, Assistant Attorney General.
   Deputy Solicitor General Feigin argued the cause for the
Page Proof Pending Publication
United States as amicus curiae urging affrmance. With
him on the brief were Solicitor General Prelogar, Assistant
Attorney General Polite, Nicole Frazer Reaves, and Paul
T. Crane.*
   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for the American
Civil Liberties Union et al. by Brian M. Hauss, Ben Wizner, David D.
Cole, Mark Silverstein, Sara R. Neel, David A. Schulz, Barbara E. Berg-
man, and Eric M. Freedman; for the Cato Institute et al. by Jay R.
Schweikert and John W. Whitehead; for the Electronic Frontier Founda-
tion et al. by David Greene; for the Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press by Bruce D. Brown; and for Elena Cordonean et al. by Norman
M. Garland and Michael M. Epstein, both pro se.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance were fled for the State of
Illinois et al. by Kwame Raoul, Attorney General of Illinois, Jane Elinor
Notz, Solicitor General, Alex Hemmer, Deputy Solicitor General, Priy-
anka Gupta, Assistant Attorney General, and Patrick J. Griffn, Chief
State's Attorney of Connecticut, and by the Attorneys General for their
respective jurisdictions as follows: Treg Taylor of Alaska, Kris Mayes
of Arizona, Kathleen Jennings of Delaware, Brian L. Schwalb of the Dis-
trict of Columbia, Anne E. Lopez of Hawaii, Brenna Bird of Iowa, Aaron
                      Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                  69

                         Opinion of the Court

   Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the Court.
   True threats of violence are outside the bounds of First
Amendment protection and punishable as crimes. Today we
consider a criminal conviction for communications falling
within that historically unprotected category. The question
presented is whether the First Amendment still requires
proof that the defendant had some subjective understanding
of the threatening nature of his statements. We hold that
it does, but that a mental state of recklessness is suffcient.
The State must show that the defendant consciously disre-
garded a substantial risk that his communications would be
viewed as threatening violence. The State need not prove
any more demanding form of subjective intent to threaten
another.

M. Frey of Maine, Andrea Joy Campbell of Massachusetts, Dana Nessel
of Michigan, Lynn Fitch of Mississippi, Aaron D. Ford of Nevada, John
M. Formella of New Hampshire, Matthew J. Platkin of New Jersey, Raúl
Page Proof Pending Publication
Torrez of New Mexico, Joshua H. Stein of North Carolina, Dave Yost of
Ohio, Ellen F. Rosenblum of Oregon, Michelle A. Henry of Pennsylvania,
Marty Jackley of South Dakota, Jonathan Skrmetti of Tennessee, Sean
D. Reyes of Utah, Charity R. Clark of Vermont, Jason S. Miyares of
Virginia, and Bridget Hill of Wyoming; for the Criminal Justice Legal
Foundation by Kent S. Scheidegger and Kymberlee C. Stapleton; for First
Amendment Scholars by Jeffrey A. Mandell and Erin K. Deeley; for First
Amendment Scholars by Charlotte H. Taylor; for the Lawyers' Committee
for Civil Rights Under Law et al. by Damon Hewitt, Jon Greenbaum,
Dariely Rodriguez, David Brody, Marc Epstein, and Anthony D. Mire-
nda; for Legal Momentum et al. by Mary-Christine Sungaila and Lynn
Hecht Schafran; for the National Family Violence Law Center et al. by
David B. Salmons, Jonathan M. Albano, Stephanie Schuster, and Joan S.
Meier; and for Coles Whalen by Allyson N. Ho, Bradley G. Hubbard, and
Paul G. Cassell.
  Briefs of amici curiae were fled for the Alliance Defending Freedom
by John J. Bursch, Tyson C. Langhofer, and Travis C. Barham; for the
Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression by Darpana M. Sheth;
for Human Rights for Kids by John H. Fleming, Suzanne S. La Pierre,
James Dold, Adam C. Pollet, Joel E. Hoffman, and Daniel Morris; and
for Jack Jordan by Mr. Jordan, pro se.
70               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Opinion of the Court

                               I
   From 2014 to 2016, petitioner Billy Counterman sent hun-
dreds of Facebook messages to C. W., a local singer and musi-
cian. The two had never met, and C. W. never responded.
In fact, she repeatedly blocked Counterman. But each time,
he created a new Facebook account and resumed his con-
tacts. Some of his messages were utterly prosaic (“Good
morning sweetheart”; “I am going to the store would you
like anything?”)—except that they were coming from a total
stranger. 3 App. 465. Others suggested that Counterman
might be surveilling C. W. He asked “[w]as that you in the
white Jeep?”; referenced “[a] fne display with your partner”;
and noted “a couple [of] physical sightings.” 497 P. 3d 1039,
1044 (Colo. App. 2021). And most critically, a number ex-
pressed anger at C. W. and envisaged harm befalling her:
“Fuck off permanently.” Ibid. “Staying in cyber life is
going to kill you.” Ibid. “You're not being good for human
Page Proof Pending Publication
relations. Die.” Ibid.
   The messages put C. W. in fear and upended her daily ex-
istence. She believed that Counterman was “threat[ening
her] life”; “was very fearful that he was following” her; and
was “afraid [she] would get hurt.” 2 App. 177, 181, 193. As
a result, she had “a lot of trouble sleeping” and suffered from
severe anxiety. Id., at 200; see id., at 194–198. She stopped
walking alone, declined social engagements, and canceled
some of her performances, though doing so caused her fnan-
cial strain. See id., at 182–183, 199, 201–206, 238–239.
Eventually, C. W. decided that she had to contact the authori-
ties. Id., at 184.
   Colorado charged Counterman under a statute making it
unlawful to “[r]epeatedly . . . make[ ] any form of communica-
tion with another person” in “a manner that would cause a
reasonable person to suffer serious emotional distress and
does cause that person . . . to suffer serious emotional dis-
tress.” Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18–3–602(1)(c) (2022). The only
                       Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     71

                          Opinion of the Court

evidence the State proposed to introduce at trial were his
Facebook messages.1
  Counterman moved to dismiss the charge on First Amend-
ment grounds, arguing that his messages were not “true
threats” and therefore could not form the basis of a criminal
prosecution. In line with Colorado law, the trial court as-
sessed the true-threat issue using an “objective `reasonable
person' standard.” People v. Cross, 127 P. 3d 71, 76 (Colo.
2006). Under that standard, the State had to show that a
reasonable person would have viewed the Facebook mes-
sages as threatening. By contrast, the State had no need to
prove that Counterman had any kind of “subjective intent to
threaten” C. W. In re R. D., 464 P. 3d 717, 731, n. 21 (Colo.
2020). The court decided, after “consider[ing] the totality
of the circumstances,” that Counterman's statements “r[o]se
to the level of a true threat.” 497 P. 3d, at 1045. Because
that was so, the court ruled, the First Amendment posed no
Page Proof Pending Publication
bar to prosecution. The court accordingly sent the case to
the jury, which found Counterman guilty as charged.
  The Colorado Court of Appeals affrmed. Counterman
had urged the court to hold that the First Amendment re-
quired the State to show that he was aware of the threaten-
ing nature of his statements. Relying on its precedent, the
court turned the request down: It “decline[d] today to say
that a speaker's subjective intent to threaten is necessary”
under the First Amendment to procure a conviction for
threatening communications. Id., at 1046 (quoting R. D., 464

   1
     The statute Counterman was charged with violating is titled a “stalk-
ing” statute and also prohibits “[r]epeatedly follow[ing], approach[ing],
contact[ing], [or] plac[ing] under surveillance” another person. § 18–3–
602(1)(c). But the State had no evidence, beyond what Counterman
claimed, that he actually had followed or surveilled C. W. For example,
C. W. had never noticed anything of that kind. So the prosecution based
its case solely on Counterman's “[r]epeated[ ] . . . communication[s]” with
C. W. Ibid.
72                  COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                           Opinion of the Court

P. 3d, at 731, n. 21). Using the established objective stand-
ard, the court then approved the trial court's ruling that
Counterman's messages were “true threats” and so were not
protected by the First Amendment. 497 P. 3d, at 1050.
The Colorado Supreme Court denied review.
   Courts are divided about (1) whether the First Amend-
ment requires proof of a defendant's subjective mindset in
true-threats cases, and (2) if so, what mens rea standard is
suffcient. We therefore granted certiorari. 598 U. S. –––
(2023).
                              II
  True threats of violence, everyone agrees, lie outside the
bounds of the First Amendment's protection. And a state-
ment can count as such a threat based solely on its objective
content. The frst dispute here is about whether the First
Amendment nonetheless demands that the State in a true-
threats case prove that the defendant was aware in some
Page Proof Pending Publication
way of the threatening nature of his communications.2 Colo-
rado argues that there is no such requirement. Counterman
contends that there is one, based mainly on the likelihood
that the absence of such a mens rea requirement will chill

   2
     A preliminary clarifcation may be useful, concerning the difference
between awareness of a communication's contents and awareness of its
threatening nature. Everyone agrees, again, that the State must prove
the former—and Colorado law appears to hold as much. See Colo. Rev.
Stat. § 18–3–602(1)(c); Brief for Respondent 18. So, for example, if a de-
fendant delivers a sealed envelope without knowing that a threatening
letter is inside, he cannot be liable for the communication. So too (though
this common example seems fairly preposterous) if a “foreigner, ignorant
of the English language, who would not know the meaning of the words,”
somehow manages to convey an English-language threat. Elonis v.
United States, 575 U. S. 723, 738 (2015) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The question in this case arises when the defendant (unlike in those hypo-
theticals) understands the content of the words, but may not grasp that
others would fnd them threatening. Must he do so, under the First
Amendment, for a true-threats prosecution to succeed?
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)            73

                      Opinion of the Court

protected, non-threatening speech. Counterman's view, we
decide today, is the more consistent with our precedent. To
combat the kind of chill he references, our decisions have
often insisted on protecting even some historically unpro-
tected speech through the adoption of a subjective mental-
state element. We follow the same path today, holding that
the State must prove in true-threats cases that the defend-
ant had some understanding of his statements' threatening
character. The second issue here concerns what precise
mens rea standard suffces for the First Amendment purpose
at issue. Again guided by our precedent, we hold that a
recklessness standard is enough. Given that a subjective
standard here shields speech not independently entitled to
protection—and indeed posing real dangers—we do not re-
quire that the State prove the defendant had any more spe-
cifc intent to threaten the victim.

                         A
Page    Proof      Pending         Publication
 “From 1791 to the present,” the First Amendment has
“permitted restrictions upon the content of speech in a few
limited areas.” United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. 460, 468
(2010). These “historic and traditional categories” are “long
familiar to the bar” and perhaps, too, the general public.
Ibid. One is incitement—statements “directed [at] pro-
ducing imminent lawless action,” and likely to do so. Bran-
denburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444, 447 (1969) (per curiam).
Another is defamation—false statements of fact harming
another's reputation. See Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418
U. S. 323, 340, 342 (1974). Still a third is obscenity—value-
less material “appeal[ing] to the prurient interest” and de-
scribing “sexual conduct” in “a patently offensive way.”
Miller v. California, 413 U. S. 15, 24 (1973). This Court has
“often described [those] historically unprotected categories
of speech as being of such slight social value as a step to
truth that any beneft that may be derived from them is
74                   COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                           Opinion of the Court

clearly outweighed by the social interest” in their proscrip-
tion. Stevens, 559 U. S., at 470 (internal quotation marks
omitted; emphasis deleted).
   “True threats” of violence is another historically unpro-
tected category of communications. Virginia v. Black, 538
U. S. 343, 359 (2003); see United States v. Alvarez, 567 U. S.
709, 717–718 (2012) (plurality opinion). The “true” in that
term distinguishes what is at issue from jests, “hyperbole,”
or other statements that when taken in context do not con-
vey a real possibility that violence will follow (say, “I am
going to kill you for showing up late”). Watts v. United
States, 394 U. S. 705, 708 (1969) (per curiam). True threats
are “serious expression[s]” conveying that a speaker means
to “commit an act of unlawful violence.” Black, 538 U. S.,
at 359. Whether the speaker is aware of, and intends to
convey, the threatening aspect of the message is not part
of what makes a statement a threat, as this Court recently
explained. See Elonis v. United States, 575 U. S. 723, 733
Page Proof Pending Publication
(2015). The existence of a threat depends not on “the men-
tal state of the author,” but on “what the statement conveys”
to the person on the other end. Ibid. When the statement
is understood as a true threat, all the harms that have long
made threats unprotected naturally follow. True threats
subject individuals to “fear of violence” and to the many
kinds of “disruption that fear engenders.” Black, 538 U. S.,
at 360 (internal quotation marks omitted). The facts of this
case well illustrate how.3
   3
     The concurrence relies on Virginia v. Black, 538 U. S. 343 (2003), to
argue that the category of true threats itself incorporates a mens rea
element. See post, at 90–93, 96 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment). But that claim is based on a misreading. The
statements the concurrence quotes merely refect that the statute involved
in the case required a showing of intent. Black did not address whether
the First Amendment demands such a showing, or why it might do so.
See United States v. Jeffries, 692 F. 3d 473, 479–480 (CA6 2012) (Sutton,
J.); see also post, at 114–115, and n. 4 (Barrett, J., dissenting) (explaining
                       Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     75

                          Opinion of the Court

   Yet the First Amendment may still demand a subjective
mental-state requirement shielding some true threats from
liability. The reason relates to what is often called a chilling
effect. Prohibitions on speech have the potential to chill, or
deter, speech outside their boundaries. A speaker may be
unsure about the side of a line on which his speech falls. Or
he may worry that the legal system will err, and count
speech that is permissible as instead not. See Philadelphia
Newspapers, Inc. v. Hepps, 475 U. S. 767, 777 (1986). Or he
may simply be concerned about the expense of becoming en-
tangled in the legal system. The result is “self-censorship”
of speech that could not be proscribed—a “cautious and re-
strictive exercise” of First Amendment freedoms. Gertz,
418 U. S., at 340. And an important tool to prevent that
outcome—to stop people from steering “wide[ ] of the unlaw-
ful zone”—is to condition liability on the State's showing of
a culpable mental state. Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513,
526 (1958). Such a requirement comes at a cost: It will
Page Proof Pending Publication
shield some otherwise proscribable (here, threatening)
speech because the State cannot prove what the defendant
thought. But the added element reduces the prospect of
chilling fully protected expression. As this Court has
noted, the requirement lessens “ the hazard of self-
censorship” by “compensat[ing]” for the law's uncertainties.
Mishkin v. New York, 383 U. S. 502, 511 (1966). Or said
a bit differently: “[B]y reducing an honest speaker's fear
that he may accidentally [or erroneously] incur liability,” a
mens rea requirement “provide[s] `breathing room' for more
valuable speech.” Alvarez, 567 U. S., at 733 (Breyer, J.,
concurring in judgment).
   That kind of “strategic protection” features in our prece-
dent concerning the most prominent categories of histori-
cally unprotected speech. Gertz, 418 U. S., at 342. Defama-
that Black concerned a different part of the statute, preventing consider-
ation of contextual factors in assessing whether a statement was a threat).
76              COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Opinion of the Court

tion is the best known and best theorized example. False
and defamatory statements of fact, we have held, have “no
constitutional value.” Id., at 340; see Alvarez, 567 U. S., at
718–719 (plurality opinion). Yet a public fgure cannot re-
cover for the injury such a statement causes unless the
speaker acted with “knowledge that it was false or with
reckless disregard of whether it was false or not.” New
York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 280 (1964); see
Garrison v. Louisiana, 379 U. S. 64, 74 (1964) (using the
same standard for criminal libel). That rule is based on fear
of “self-censorship”—the worry that without such a subjec-
tive mental-state requirement, the uncertainties and ex-
pense of litigation will deter speakers from making even
truthful statements. Sullivan, 376 U. S., at 279. The First
Amendment, we have concluded, “requires that we protect
some falsehood in order to protect speech that matters.”
Gertz, 418 U. S., at 341.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   The same idea arises in the law respecting obscenity and
incitement to unlawful conduct. Like threats, incitement in-
heres in particular words used in particular contexts: Its
harm can arise even when a clueless speaker fails to grasp
his expression's nature and consequence. But still, the First
Amendment precludes punishment, whether civil or criminal,
unless the speaker's words were “intended” (not just likely)
to produce imminent disorder. Hess v. Indiana, 414 U. S.
105, 109 (1973) (per curiam); see Brandenburg, 395 U. S.,
at 447; NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U. S. 886,
927–929 (1982). That rule helps prevent a law from deter-
ring “mere advocacy” of illegal acts—a kind of speech fall-
ing within the First Amendment's core. Brandenburg, 395
U. S., at 449. And for a similar reason, the First Amend-
ment demands proof of a defendant's mindset to make out an
obscenity case. Obscenity is obscenity, whatever the pur-
veyor's mental state. But we have repeatedly recognized
that punishment depends on a “vital element of scienter”—
often described as the defendant's awareness of “the charac-
                        Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                      77

                           Opinion of the Court

ter and nature” of the materials he distributed. Hamling v.
United States, 418 U. S. 87, 122–123 (1974); see Elonis, 575
U. S., at 739 (reiterating Hamling). The rationale should by
now be familiar. Yes, “obscene speech and writings are not
protected.” Smith v. California, 361 U. S. 147, 152 (1959).
But punishing their distribution without regard to scienter
would “have the collateral effect of inhibiting” protected ex-
pression. Id., at 151. Given “the ambiguities inherent in
the defnition of obscenity,” the First Amendment “requires
proof of scienter to avoid the hazard of self-censorship.”
Mishkin, 383 U. S., at 511.4
   The same reasoning counsels in favor of requiring a subjec-
tive element in a true-threats case. This Court again must
consider the prospect of chilling non-threatening expression,
given the ordinary citizen's predictable tendency to steer

   4
     The dissent, in urging an objective standard here, reads the obscenity
decisions as requiring merely that the defendant know “what the material
Page Proof Pending Publication
depicts” (as a speaker must know a communication's contents). Post, at
110–111 (opinion of Barrett, J.) (relying on Hamling, 418 U. S., at 120–
123). But see the statements quoted above: That is not what they say.
And indeed, this Court recently rejected the dissent's revisionist reading,
explaining in detail—and in response to a near-identical argument—that
the obscenity decisions demand awareness of “the character of [the materi-
als,] not simply [their] contents.” Elonis, 575 U. S., at 739–740 (discussing
Hamling, 418 U. S., at 120–123, and Mishkin, 383 U. S., at 510).
   The dissent's use of two other First Amendment categories—fghting
words and false commercial speech—to support an objective test also falls
fat. See post, at 109–110 (opinion of Barrett, J.). This Court has not
upheld a conviction under the fghting-words doctrine in 80 years. At the
least, that doctrine is today a poor candidate for spinning off other First
Amendment rules. False commercial speech is also a poor analog, though
for different reasons. Put aside that the line of cases the dissent invokes
has never been listed among the historically unprotected categories of
speech. See, e. g., United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. 460, 468 (2010); see
supra, at 73–74. Yet more relevant, the Court has often noted that com-
mercial speech is less vulnerable to chill than most other speech is. See,
e. g., Board of Trustees of State Univ. of N. Y. v. Fox, 492 U. S. 469, 481
(1989). And it is the fear of chill that has led to state-of-mind require-
ments in the context of unprotected speech.
78               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Opinion of the Court

“wide[ ] of the unlawful zone.” Speiser, 357 U. S., at 526.
The speaker's fear of mistaking whether a statement is a
threat; his fear of the legal system getting that judgment
wrong; his fear, in any event, of incurring legal costs—all
those may lead him to swallow words that are in fact not
true threats. Some 50 years ago, Justice Marshall made the
point when reviewing a true-threats prosecution arguably
involving only political hyperbole. See Rogers v. United
States, 422 U. S. 35 (1975). The Court in Rogers reversed
the conviction on other grounds, but Justice Marshall focused
on the danger of deterring non-threatening speech. An ob-
jective standard, turning only on how reasonable observers
would construe a statement in context, would make people
give threats “a wide berth.” Id., at 47 (concurring opinion).
And so use of that standard would discourage the “uninhib-
ited, robust, and wide-open debate that the First Amend-
ment is intended to protect.” Id., at 48 (quoting Sullivan,
376 U. S., at 270).
Page Proof Pending Publication
   The reasoning—and indeed some of the words—came
straight from this Court's decisions insisting on a subjective
element in other unprotected-speech cases, whether involv-
ing defamation, incitement, or obscenity. No doubt, the ap-
proach in all of those cases has a cost: Even as it lessens
chill of protected speech, it makes prosecution of otherwise
proscribable, and often dangerous, communications harder.
And the balance between those two effects may play out dif-
ferently in different contexts, as the next part of this opinion
discusses. But the ban on an objective standard remains
the same, lest true-threats prosecutions chill too much pro-
tected, non-threatening expression.

                               B
   The next question concerns the type of subjective stand-
ard the First Amendment requires. The law of mens rea
offers three basic choices. Purpose is the most culpable
level in the standard mental-state hierarchy, and the hardest
                       Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                    79

                          Opinion of the Court

to prove. A person acts purposefully when he “consciously
desires” a result—so here, when he wants his words to be
received as threats. United States v. Bailey, 444 U. S. 394,
404 (1980). Next down, though not often distinguished from
purpose, is knowledge. Ibid. A person acts knowingly
when “he is aware that [a] result is practically certain to
follow”—so here, when he knows to a practical certainty that
others will take his words as threats. Ibid. (internal quota-
tion marks omitted). A greater gap separates those two
from recklessness. A person acts recklessly, in the most
common formulation, when he “consciously disregard[s] a
substantial [and unjustifable] risk that the conduct will
cause harm to another.” Voisine v. United States, 579 U. S.
686, 691 (2016) (internal quotation marks omitted). That
standard involves insuffcient concern with risk, rather than
awareness of impending harm. See Borden v. Uni ted
States, 593 U. S. –––, ––– (2021) (plurality opinion). But still,
recklessness is morally culpable conduct, involving a “delib-
Page Proof Pending Publication
erate decision to endanger another.” Voisine, 579 U. S., at
694. In the threats context, it means that a speaker is
aware “that others could regard his statements as” threaten-
ing violence and “delivers them anyway.” Elonis, 575 U. S.,
at 746 (Alito, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).5
   Among those standards, recklessness offers the right path
forward. We have so far mostly focused on the constitu-
tional interest in free expression, and on the correlative need

  5
    Just to complete the mens rea hierarchy, the last level is negligence—
but that is an objective standard, of the kind we have just rejected. A
person acts negligently if he is not but should be aware of a substantial
risk—here, that others will understand his words as threats. See Borden,
593 U. S., at ––– (plurality opinion). That makes liability depend not on
what the speaker thinks, but instead on what a reasonable person would
think about whether his statements are threatening in nature. See
Elonis, 575 U. S., at 738 (“Having liability turn on whether a reasonable
person regards the communication as a threat—regardless of what the
defendant thinks—reduces culpability . . . to negligence” (internal quota-
tion marks omitted)).
80               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Opinion of the Court

to take into account threat prosecutions' chilling effects.
But the precedent we have relied on has always recog-
nized—and insisted on “accommodat[ing]”—the “competing
value[ ]” in regulating historically unprotected expression.
Gertz, 418 U. S., at 348. Here, as we have noted, that value
lies in protecting against the profound harms, to both indi-
viduals and society, that attend true threats of violence—as
evidenced in this case. See supra, at 70, 74. The injury
associated with those statements caused history long ago to
place them outside the First Amendment's bounds. When
despite that judgment we require use of a subjective mental-
state standard, we necessarily impede some true-threat
prosecutions. And as we go up the subjective mens rea lad-
der, that imposition on States' capacity to counter true
threats becomes still greater—and, presumably, with dimin-
ishing returns for protected expression. In advancing past
recklessness, we make it harder for a State to substantiate
Page Proof Pending Publication
the needed inferences about mens rea (absent, as is usual,
direct evidence). And of particular importance, we prevent
States from convicting morally culpable defendants. See
Elonis, 575 U. S., at 745 (opinion of Alito, J.). For reckless
defendants have done more than make a bad mistake. They
have consciously accepted a substantial risk of inficting seri-
ous harm.
   Using a recklessness standard also fts with the analysis
in our defamation decisions. As noted earlier, the Court
there adopted a recklessness rule, applicable in both civil
and criminal contexts, as a way of accommodating competing
interests. See supra, at 75–76. In the more than half-
century in which that standard has governed, few have sug-
gested that it needs to be higher—in other words, that still
more First Amendment “breathing space” is required.
Gertz, 418 U. S., at 342. And we see no reason to offer
greater insulation to threats than to defamation. See
Elonis, 575 U. S., at 748 (opinion of Alito, J.). The societal
                    Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)               81

                       Opinion of the Court

interests in countering the former are at least as high. And
the protected speech near the borderline of true threats
(even though sometimes political, as in Rogers) is, if any-
thing, further from the First Amendment's central concerns
than the chilled speech in Sullivan-type cases (i. e., truthful
reputation-damaging statements about public offcials and
fgures).
  It is true that our incitement decisions demand more—
but the reason for that demand is not present here. When
incitement is at issue, we have spoken in terms of specifc
intent, presumably equivalent to purpose or knowledge.
See Hess, 414 U. S., at 109; supra, at 76. In doing so, we
recognized that incitement to disorder is commonly a hair's-
breadth away from political “advocacy”—and particularly
from strong protests against the government and prevailing
social order. Brandenburg, 395 U. S., at 447. Such protests
gave rise to all the cases in which the Court demanded a
Page Proof Pending Publication
showing of intent. See ibid.; Hess, 414 U. S., at 106; Clai-
borne Hardware Co., 458 U. S., at 888, 928. And the Court
decided those cases against a resonant historical backdrop:
the Court's failure, in an earlier era, to protect mere advo-
cacy of force or lawbreaking from legal sanction. See, e. g.,
Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357 (1927); Gitlow v. New
York, 268 U. S. 652 (1925); Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S.
616 (1919). A strong intent requirement was, and remains,
one way to guarantee history was not repeated. It was a
way to ensure that efforts to prosecute incitement would not
bleed over, either directly or through a chilling effect, to dis-
senting political speech at the First Amendment's core. But
the potency of that protection is not needed here. For the
most part, the speech on the other side of the true-threats
boundary line—as compared with the advocacy addressed in
our incitement decisions—is neither so central to the theory
of the First Amendment nor so vulnerable to government
prosecutions. It is not just that our incitement decisions are
82                   COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                            Opinion of the Court

distinguishable; it is more that they compel the use of a dis-
tinct standard here.6
   That standard, again, is recklessness. It offers “enough
`breathing space' for protected speech,” without sacrifcing
too many of the benefts of enforcing laws against true
threats. Elonis, 575 U. S., at 748 (opinion of Alito, J.). As
with any balance, something is lost on both sides: The rule
we adopt today is neither the most speech-protective nor the
most sensitive to the dangers of true threats. But in declin-
ing one of those two alternative paths, something more im-
portant is gained: Not “having it all”—because that is impos-
sible—but having much of what is important on both sides
of the scale.7
                              III
  It is time to return to Counterman's case, though only
a few remarks are necessary. Counterman, as described
above, was prosecuted in accordance with an objective stand-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ard. See supra, at 71–72. The State had to show only that
a reasonable person would understand his statements
as threats. It did not have to show any awareness on
his part that the statements could be understood that way.
For the reasons stated, that is a violation of the First
Amendment.

  6
     Our obscenity decisions are of no help in this inquiry, because the Court
has never determined the precise mens rea needed to impose punishment.
In arguing to the contrary, the concurrence relies mainly on Hamling.
Post, at 100 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). But if the dissent is wrong in
saying that Hamling (and other obscenity decisions) allowed an objective
inquiry, see supra, at 77, n. 4, the concurrence is wrong in suggesting that
it required use of a purpose or knowledge standard. As to the concur-
rence's claim, Hamling held only that a statute with that standard was
“constitutionally suffcient.” 418 U. S., at 123. The decision said nothing
about whether it was constitutionally necessary, or instead whether a
recklessness standard would suffce as well.
   7
     The dissent accuses the Court of making a “Goldilocks judgment” in
favoring a recklessness standard. Post, at 118 (opinion of Barrett, J.).
But in law, as in life, there are worse things than being “just right.”
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)              83

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

  We accordingly vacate the judgment of the Colorado Court
of Appeals and remand the case for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion.
                                           It is so ordered.

  Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Gorsuch joins
as to Parts I, II, III–A, and III–B, concurring in part and
concurring in the judgment.
   When the government seeks to punish speech based on its
content, the First Amendment typically imposes stringent
requirements. This ensures that the government, even
when pursuing compelling objectives, does not unduly bur-
den our Nation's commitment to free expression. “From
1791 to the present, however, the First Amendment has per-
mitted restrictions upon the content of speech in a few lim-
ited areas.” United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. 460, 468
(2010) (internal quotation marks omitted). These categories
Page Proof Pending Publication
must be “well-defned and narrowly limited” in light of the
serious consequences that fow from carving out speech from
ordinary First Amendment protections. Chaplinsky v. New
Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 571 (1942).
   “True threats” are one such category, and there is a tradi-
tion of criminalizing threats stretching back centuries. This
includes punishing single utterances based on the message
conveyed. One paradigmatic example of this would be writ-
ing and mailing a letter threatening to assassinate the Presi-
dent. Such laws are plainly important. There is no long-
standing tradition, however, of punishing speech merely
because it is unintentionally threatening. Instead, this
Court's precedent, along with historical statutes and cases,
refect a commonsense understanding that threatening some-
one is an intentional act. As to what intent is needed, “[t]ra-
ditionally, one intends certain consequences when he desires
that his acts cause those consequences or knows that those
consequences are substantially certain to result from his
acts.” Tison v. Arizona, 481 U. S. 137, 150 (1987) (internal
84               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

quotation marks omitted). This does not require showing
that an individual intends to carry through with the threat.
But it does require showing that an individual desires to
threaten or is substantially certain that her statements will
be understood as threatening.
   Today, unfortunately, the Court unnecessarily departs
from this traditional understanding. That is not to say that
I disagree with the Court on everything. Far from it. I
join the Court's conclusion that some subjective mens rea
is required in true-threats cases. I also agree that in this
particular case, where petitioner was prosecuted for stalking
that involved threatening statements, a mens rea of reckless-
ness is amply suffcient. Where I part ways with the Court
is that I would not reach the distinct and more complex ques-
tion whether a mens rea of recklessness is suffcient for true-
threats prosecutions generally. Further, requiring nothing
more than a mens rea of recklessness is inconsistent with
precedent, history, and the commitment to even harmful
Page Proof Pending Publication
speech that the First Amendment enshrines. I therefore
respectfully concur only in part and in the judgment.

                               I
  As an initial matter, I do not believe that this Court should
reach the question whether recklessness is suffcient for
true-threats prosecutions. A key conceptual distinction is
helpful for explaining why. On the one hand, there are
statements that are objectively threatening. In some cases,
such statements can be punished because they fall into the
unprotected category of “true threats.” Yet such state-
ments can also be punished if they fall into another category
of unprotected speech, such as speech integral to criminal
conduct. Or they might warrant less First Amendment
protection for other reasons. On the other hand, there is
the question of what constitutes the well-defned and long-
standing category of unprotected true threats. It is with
this latter question that I do not see the need to address
                        Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     85

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

whether a mens rea of recklessness is suffcient across the
board.
   First, the courts below did not address whether reckless-
ness was suffcient to prosecute true threats and neither of
the actual parties have advocated a recklessness standard.
Colorado disclaimed the idea that recklessness was required,
and petitioner asserted, correctly, that recklessness had not
been raised under traditional principles of party presenta-
tion. The briefng on recklessness consists almost entirely
of a few pages of an argument in the alternative at the tail
end of an amicus brief fled by the United States.
   Second, because petitioner was prosecuted for stalking in-
volving threatening speech, this case does not require resort
to the true-threats exemption to the First Amendment.
   True-threats doctrine covers content-based prosecutions
for single utterances of “pure speech,” which need not even
be communicated to the subject of the threat. Watts v.
United States, 394 U. S. 705, 707 (1969) (per curiam). The
Page Proof Pending Publication
First Amendment would normally place strict limits on such
prosecutions. So there is typically a need to determine
whether the speech in question falls within the traditionally
unprotected category of true threats.
   This is not such a case, however. Petitioner was convicted
for “stalking [causing] serious emotional distress” for a com-
bination of threatening statements and repeated, unwanted,
direct contact with C. W. 497 P. 3d 1039, 1043 (Colo. App.
2021).1 This kind of prosecution raises fewer First Amend-
ment concerns for a variety of reasons. Stalking can be car-
ried out through speech but need not be, which requires less
First Amendment scrutiny when speech is swept in. See,
e. g., Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional

   1
     The statute of conviction applies to someone who “[r]epeatedly follows,
approaches, contacts, places under surveillance, or makes any form of com-
munication with another person . . . in a manner that would cause a reason-
able person to suffer serious emotional distress and does cause that person
. . . serious emotional distress.” Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18–3–602(1)(c) (2022).
86                  COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Rights, Inc., 547 U. S. 47, 62 (2006). The content of the re-
peated communications can sometimes be irrelevant, such as
persistently calling someone and hanging up, or a stream of
“utterly prosaic” communications. Ante, at 70. Repeat-
edly forcing intrusive communications directly into the per-
sonal life of “an unwilling recipient” also enjoys less protec-
tion. Rowan v. Post Offce Dept., 397 U. S. 728, 738 (1970).
Finally, while there is considerable risk with a single intem-
perate utterance that a speaker will “accidentally or errone-
ously incur liability,” ante, at 75 (internal quotation marks and
alterations omitted), that risk is far reduced with a course of
repeated unwanted contact. Take, for example, petitioner
continuously contacting C. W. despite her blocking him.
   Given this, prosecuting threatening statements made as
part of a course of stalking does not squarely present the
hardest questions about the mens rea required to prosecute
isolated utterances based solely on their content.2 True-
threats doctrine came up below only because of the lower
Page Proof Pending Publication
courts' doubtful assumption that petitioner could be prose-
cuted only if his actions fell under the true-threats exception.
I do not think that is accurate, given the lessened First
Amendment concerns at issue. In such cases, recklessness
is amply suffcient. And I would stop there. There is sim-
ply no need to reach out in this stalking case to determine
whether anything more than recklessness is needed for pun-
ishing true threats generally.

                                    II
   Lest there be any doubt, the First Amendment stakes
around the defnition of “true threats” are high indeed. The
First Amendment's mantle covers speech that is “vitupera-
tive, abusive and inexact.” Watts, 394 U. S., at 708. “It
might be tempting to dismiss” seemingly low-value speech
“as unworthy of . . . robust First Amendment protections.”
  2
    For these reasons, stalking prosecutions that do not rely on the content
of communications would raise even fewer First Amendment concerns.
                     Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)               87

                     Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Mahanoy Area School Dist. v. B. L., 594 U. S. –––, ––– (2021).
Yet “[m]ost of what we say to one another lacks `religious,
political, scientifc, educational, journalistic, historical, or ar-
tistic value' (let alone serious value), but it is still sheltered
from Government regulation.” Stevens, 559 U. S., at 479
(emphasis deleted). First Amendment vigilance is espe-
cially important when speech is disturbing, frightening, or
painful, because the undesirability of such speech will place
a heavy thumb in favor of silencing it. In response, the
Court has upheld First Amendment rights in the context of
gruesome animal cruelty videos, id., at 472; cross burning,
Virginia v. Black, 538 U. S. 343, 347–348 (2003); hateful rhet-
oric in protests of the funerals of fallen soldiers, Snyder v.
Phelps, 562 U. S. 443, 448–449, 458 (2011); and computer-
generated images of child pornography, Ashcroft v. Free
Speech Coalition, 535 U. S. 234, 239–240, 258 (2002).
   The risk of overcriminalizing upsetting or frightening
Page Proof Pending Publication
speech has only been increased by the internet. Our soci-
ety's discourse occurs more and more in “the `vast demo-
cratic forums of the Internet' in general, and social media in
particular.” Packingham v. North Carolina, 582 U. S. 98,
104 (2017) (citation omitted). “Rapid changes in the dynam-
ics of communication and information transmission” have led
to equally rapid and ever-evolving changes “in what society
accepts as proper behavior.” Ontario v. Quon, 560 U. S.
746, 759 (2010). Different corners of the internet have con-
siderably different norms around appropriate speech. On-
line communication can also lack many normal contextual
clues, such as who is speaking, tone of voice, and expression.
Moreover, it is easy for speech made in a one context to inad-
vertently reach a larger audience.
   Without suffcient protection for unintentionally threaten-
ing speech, a high school student who is still learning norms
around appropriate language could easily go to prison for
sending another student violent music lyrics, or for unre-
fectingly using language he read in an online forum. “[A]
88               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

drunken joke” in bad taste can lead to criminal prosecution.
Perez v. Florida, 580 U. S. 1187 (2016) (Sotomayor, J.,
concurring in denial of certiorari). In the heat of the mo-
ment, someone may post an enraged comment under a news
story about a controversial topic. Another person might
reply equally heatedly. In a Nation that has never been
timid about its opinions, political or otherwise, this is
commonplace.
   Many of this Court's true-threats cases involve such
charged political speech. See Black, 538 U. S., at 348–349
(Ku Klux Klan rally); Watts, 394 U. S., at 707 (antiwar pro-
test); Rogers v. United States, 422 U. S. 35, 41–42, 47–48
(1975) (Marshall, J., concurring) (opposition to Nixon's poli-
cies toward China). Amici give further contemporary ex-
amples of such speech from across the political spectrum.
See, e. g., Brief for American Civil Liberties Union et al. as
Amici Curiae 24–29. Much of this speech exists in a gray
Page Proof Pending Publication
area where it will be quite hard to predict whether a jury
would fnd it threatening. And the ubiquity of such speech
raises the possibility of highly discretionary enforcement.
   The burdens of overcriminalization will fall hardest on cer-
tain groups. A jury's determination of when angry hyper-
bole crosses the line will depend on amorphous norms around
language, which will vary greatly from one discursive com-
munity to another. Juries' decisions will refect their “back-
ground knowledge and media consumption.” Minnesota
Voters Alliance v. Mansky, 585 U. S. –––, ––– (2018).
“[S]peakers whose ideas or views occupy the fringes of our
society have more to fear, for their violent and extreme rhet-
oric, even if intended simply to convey an idea or express
displeasure, is more likely to strike a reasonable person as
threatening.” United States v. White, 670 F. 3d 498, 525
(CA4 2012) (Floyd, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part). Members of certain groups, including religious and
cultural minorities, can also use language that is more sus-
ceptible to being misinterpreted by outsiders. And unfortu-
                        Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     89

                        Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

nately yet predictably, racial and cultural stereotypes can
also infuence whether speech is perceived as dangerous.
See, e. g., A. Dunbar, C. Kubrin, & N. Scurich, The Threaten-
ing Nature of “Rap” Music, 22 J. Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L.
281, 281–282, 288–290 (2016).
   On the other hand, the internet has also made stalking and
harassment even easier. Stalking can be devastating and
dangerous. See Brief for First Amendment Scholars as
Amici Curiae 7–8. Lives can be ruined, and in the most
tragic instances, lives are lost. Ibid. Harassers can hide
behind online anonymity while tormenting others. This
happens in the context of intimate relationships and it hap-
pens with strangers. Overly constraining our society's abil-
ity to respond to stalking would come at a real cost. For
the reasons given, however, a mens rea standard for true
threats would not hinder stalking prosecutions. See supra,
at 85–86.
   Even isolated threatening speech can do real harm. Such
Page Proof Pending Publication
speech not only disrupts lives, it can silence the speech of
others who become afraid to speak out. A mens rea re-
quirement would not, however, present an uncommon or in-
surmountable barrier to true-threats prosecutions.3 None-
theless, under such a standard, there will be some speech
that some fnd threatening that will not and should not land
anyone in prison.
                              III
  These high First Amendment stakes are further reason
for caution when delineating the boundaries of what consti-
tutes a true threat. In undertaking that analysis, the Court
and I part ways on the order of operations. The Court be-
  3
    Intent requirements are common, including for incitement that results
in actual violence, not just the threat of it. See infra, at 97–99. For that
reason there are longstanding frameworks for determining when someone
is not guilty by reason of insanity, and when delusions do (and do not)
defeat a showing of intent. See, e. g., 1 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal
Law §§ 7.1(a), (b) (3d ed. 2018); 2 id., § 9.2.
90               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

gins by defning true threats as all objectively threatening
speech, entirely independent of whether the speaker in-
tended to be threatening, ante, at 74, and the lead dissent
agrees, post, at 107–108 (opinion of Barrett, J.). The Court
gets there by relying on this Court's interpretation of the
word “threat” in a federal statute. Ante, at 74 (citing
Elonis v. United States, 575 U. S. 723, 733 (2015)). The
Court declares all such speech categorically unprotected, and
then asks what “buffer zone” is needed in order to protect
other, unthreatening speech. See ante, at 72–75.
   Respectfully, I see the analysis differently. The frst step
in the analysis should instead be to ask about the scope of
the well-defned and narrow category of “true threats” as a
constitutional matter. This Court has already warned about
the danger of creating new categories of “unprotected
speech” exempt from the ordinary First Amendment frame-
work for balancing our society's commitment to free expres-
sion with other interests. Stevens, 559 U. S., at 470. If
Page Proof Pending Publication
courts were at liberty to redefne what counts as a “threat”
or “defamation” at will, this would achieve the same results
as creating new categories of unprotected speech.
   Thus, the Court must frst ask whether there is a long-
standing tradition of punishing inadvertent threats as “true
threats.” This Court's prior defnition of the word “threat”
in a federal statute, looking primarily to dictionaries, Elonis,
575 U. S., at 733, does not tell us the scope of “true threats”
for First Amendment purposes. Elonis itself made clear
that it did “not . . . consider any First Amendment issues.”
Id., at 740. Instead, a careful examination of this Court's
true-threats precedent and the history of threat crimes does
not support a long-settled tradition of punishing inadvert-
ently threatening speech.
                                A
  A natural place to begin, one might think, would be with
this Court's most recent decision involving the First Amend-
ment, mens rea, and true threats. Yet to read the Court's
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)              91

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

decision, one would have little idea that in a seminal 2003
decision, this Court held that a threat conviction could not
stand because of an insuffcient mens rea requirement. See
Black, 538 U. S. 343. Black plainly sets out a conception of
true threats as including a mens rea requirement.
   In Black, the Court confronted the constitutionality of a
Virginia statute that prohibited burning a cross with intent
to intimidate. Only part of the decision in Black is con-
tained in a fve-Justice majority opinion. The other relevant
parts of the decision were written by the Members of that
majority, who split into a four-Justice plurality and Justice
Scalia's partial concurrence in judgment.
   The majority explained why a prohibition on cross burning
with intent to threaten was constitutional, beginning by de-
fning the category of true threats. “ `True threats,' ” the
majority explained “encompass those statements where the
speaker means to communicate a serious expression of an
Page Proof Pending Publication
intent to commit an act of unlawful violence.” Id., at 359
(emphasis added). However, “[t]he speaker need not actu-
ally intend to carry out the threat,” as true threats also in-
clude intimidation alone. Id., at 359–360. And “[i]ntimida-
tion in the constitutionally proscribable sense of the word is
a type of true threat, where a speaker directs a threat to a
person or group of persons with the intent of placing the
victim in fear of bodily harm or death.” Id., at 360 (empha-
sis added).
   To the extent the Virginia statute covered intentionally
threatening cross burning, it was thus tailored to cover only
true threats. Critically, however, the statute also provided
that “ `[a]ny such burning of a cross shall be prima facie evi-
dence of an intent to intimidate.' ” Id., at 348. In other
words, the all-important intent requirement could be satis-
fed by the mere conduct itself.
   Consistent with the majority's defnition of true threats,
both the plurality and Justice Scalia agreed that the lack of
a suffcient intent requirement meant that a conviction under
92                   COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

the statute could not stand. Id., at 367, 379. For the plu-
rality, the intent requirement was “the very reason why a
State may ban cross burning” because it “distinguish[ed]”
between the constitutionally unprotected true threat of
burning a cross with intent to intimidate and “cross burning
[as] a statement of ideology.” Id., at 365–366.4 For Justice
Scalia, the “plurality [was] correct in all of this.” Id., at 372
(opinion concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part,
and dissenting in part). There was a constitutional need for
a distinction between cross burning “ `intended to intimi-
date' ” and cross burning as “ `a statement of ideology.' ”
Ibid. The plurality and Justice Scalia only parted ways as
to whether to hold that the statute was “facially invalid,” id.,
at 367 (plurality opinion), or just that the jury instructions
made it unclear “whether the jury has rendered its verdict
(as it must)” with suffcient consideration of “intent to intim-
idate,” id., at 380 (opinion of Scalia, J.) (emphasis added).
   The through-line is not hard to discern. First, unpro-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tected true threats include a subjective mens rea require-
ment. Id., at 360 (majority opinion). Second, as a result,
“Virginia's statute does not run afoul of the First Amend-
ment insofar as it bans cross burning with intent to intimi-
date.” Id., at 362 (majority opinion). Third, a conviction
could not stand if it had categorically dispensed with that
intent requirement, id., at 365–366 (plurality opinion), or if
the jury had insuffciently considered “intent to intimidate,”
id., at 380 (opinion of Scalia, J.).
  4
    The lead dissent asserts that the Black plurality's decision was based
on how the statute “ `ignore[d] all of the contextual factors that are neces-
sary to decide whether a particular cross burning' was covered by the
statute.” Post, at 114–115 (opinion of Barrett, J.) (quoting 538 U. S., at
367 (plurality opinion)). But some context is missing from this reading
itself. The full sentence is “all of the contextual factors that are necessary
to decide whether a particular cross burning is intended to intimidate.”
Id., at 367 (emphasis added). The plurality was thus concerned with con-
text to the extent it was relevant to the mens rea requirement needed to
render the statute constitutional. Id., at 365–366.
                         Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                       93

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

  In sum, all fve Justices in the Black majority agreed
that a true-threats prosecution could not stand under the
First Amendment without a suffcient subjective mens rea
requirement.5
                             B
   In defning true threats as “statements where the speaker
means to communicate a serious expression of an intent to
commit an act of unlawful violence,” id., at 359, the Court in
Black echoed the traditional understanding of threats. His-
torically, threat crimes covered the same kind of subjectively
threatening speech Black invoked.
   In reviewing this history, it is also vital to keep in mind
the nature of the inquiry. Removing speech from normal
First Amendment scrutiny is a major shift in the balance of
expression and public interest that our Constitution gener-
ally strikes. The inquiry is therefore whether there is a
“long-settled tradition” of prohibiting inadvertently threat-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ening speech. Stevens, 559 U. S., at 469. None of the other
opinions, however, identify a historical case that expressly
raised the question whether a subjective mens rea is re-
quired and held that it is not. That is a remarkable thing
  5
    According to the Court today and the lead dissent, however, Black
somehow managed not to say anything about the First Amendment mens
rea requirement for true-threats prosecutions—while striking down a
true-threat conviction under the First Amendment for an insuffcient
mens rea requirement. On this reading, Black only discussed intent be-
cause “the statute involved in the case required a showing of intent.”
Ante, at 74, n. 3; post, at 115, n. 4 (discussion of intent was “a reference to
the statutory requirements for a conviction, not the constitutional re-
quirements”). This puzzling interpretation does not explain why an illu-
sory mens rea requirement in a Virginia law would pose any First Amend-
ment problems if the Amendment did not impose a mens rea requirement
of this kind. After all, “[w]hy would the First Amendment care how a
jury goes about fnding an [intent] element that is a matter of indifference
to the Amendment?” United States v. Heineman, 767 F. 3d 970, 980
(CA10 2014). The obvious answer, from Black's reasoning to its holding,
is that such a mens rea requirement was necessary for the statute to
target true threats.
94               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

when one considers that the sample size consists of decisions
from both sides of the Atlantic across centuries.
   There was a long tradition of crimes for threatening an-
other person in order to extort them. See, e. g., 1796 N. J.
Laws § 57, p. 108. Colorado and the United States admit
that this core category of threat crimes required intent.
   Even beyond that, a subjective mens rea remained a key
component of threat offenses. An 18th-century English
statute made it a capital offense to “knowingly send any let-
ter . . . threatening to kill or murder any of his Majesty's
subject or subjects” or to threaten arson. 27 Geo. II, c. 15,
in 21 Eng. Stat. at Large 184 (1754). A leading treatise ex-
plained that the statute was “levelled against such whose
intention it was [to] obtain their object by creating terror in
[the victim's] mind.” 2 W. Russell & D. Davis, Crimes &
Misdemeanors *1845 (emphasis added).
   Consistent with this, defendants were convicted of “know-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ingly, wilfully, and feloniously” sending threatening letters.
Rex v. Tyler, 1 Mood. 428, 168 Eng. Rep. 1330 (1835); Rex v.
Paddle, Russ. & Ry. 484, 168 Eng. Rep. 910 (1822) (indict-
ment for “knowingly, unlawfully, wickedly, and feloniously”
sending a threatening letter); see also King v. Girdwood,
1 Leach 142, 168 Eng. Rep. 173 (1776) (indictment for “felo-
niously” sending a threatening letter). “ `[K]nowingly and
wilfully' effecting any result applies to those who know that
the acts performed will have that effect, and perform
them with the intention that such shall be their operation.”
12 American and English Encyclopaedia of Law 522–524
(J. Merrill ed. 1890); see also J. Boag, Imperial Lexicon of the
English Language 530 (1850) (defning “felonious” as “with
the deliberate purpose to commit a crime”).
   The necessary mens rea could sometimes be inferred from
the content of the letter, but could be rebutted by other evi-
dence. See King v. Philipps, 6 East 464, 475, 102 Eng. Rep.
1365, 1369 (1805). Courts thus considered “the threat in-
tended to be made by the prisoner” and “what he meant by
                    Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)              95

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

what he had written” in determining whether he had vio-
lated the statute. Regina v. Hill, 5 Cox 233, 235 (Crim. Cas.
1851); see also King v. John and Mary Hammond, 1 Leach
444, 446, 168 Eng. Rep. 324, 325 (1787) (describing the offense
of sending a threatening letter “to the party whose fears the
threat it contains was calculated to alarm”).
   Threat laws in the United States were of a piece. Some
state laws about threats expressly required maliciousness.
See Me. Rev. Stat., Tit. 12, ch. 154, § 26 (1840); 1884 La. Acts
No. 64, § 1, p. 86. Courts more generally emphasized the
importance of a mens rea requirement. See, e. g., State v.
Benedict, 11 Vt. 236, 239 (1839). The North Carolina Su-
preme Court, for example, singled out threats as quintessen-
tial examples of offenses where it is “necessary” to prove the
“intent of the particular letter.” State v. Murphy, 84 N. C.
742, 743–744 (1881). And where state statutes may have
been silent on intent to threaten, courts read such require-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ments in. See Commonwealth v. Morton, 140 Ky. 628, 631,
131 S. W. 506, 507–508 (1910) (letter must be “calculated to
alarm, disturb, intimidate, or injure”); see also State v. Stew-
art, 90 Mo. 507, 512, 2 S. W. 790, 792 (1887) ( jury instruction
requiring that “ `defendant intended to threaten' ”).
   Leading treatises also explained the importance of mens
rea. See 25 American and English Encyclopaedia of Law
1071 (C. Williams ed. 1894) (when there is a question as to
“whether or not the letter contains the threat alleged, the
intent is a question for the jury”); see also 2 R. Anderson,
Wharton's Criminal Law and Procedure § 803, pp. 659–660
(1957) (threats must be “intended to put the person threat-
ened in fear of bodily harm”); 2 J. Bishop, Commentaries on
the Criminal Law § 1201, p. 664 (6th ed. 1877) (“The intent,
both under the unwritten law and under the statutes, must
be evil”).
   Against that backdrop, I return to the inquiry at hand:
whether there is a “long-settled” or “well-established” his-
tory of prosecuting inadvertently threatening speech.
96               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                     Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

There is no line of cases or pattern of statutes affrmatively
stating that an objective standard is suffcient.

                                C
   Put together, Black and the history point to an intent re-
quirement. When Black defned and analyzed true threats
in terms of intent, there is no reason to think the Court used
intent to mean anything less than its traditional defnition of
purpose or knowledge. See, e. g., Tison, 481 U. S., at 150.
Nor would a recklessness standard play the necessary role
of distinguishing between cross burning that is “ `intended
to intimidate' . . . and nonintimidating cross burning [that]
cannot be prohibited.” 538 U. S., at 372 (opinion of Sca-
lia, J.). Given the violent history of the symbol, it is hard to
imagine that any politically motivated cross burning done
within view of the public could be carried out without aware-
ness of some risk a reasonable spectator would feel threat-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ened. See id., at 388–391 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Reck-
lessness, which turns so heavily on an objective person
standard, would not have been enough.
   As to the history, it is true that over time courts have
often used a wide variety of terms to describe mental states.
See, e. g., Morissette v. United States, 342 U. S. 246, 252
(1952). Yet “[t]he element of intent in the criminal law has
traditionally been viewed as a bifurcated concept embracing
either the specifc requirement of purpose or the more gen-
eral one of knowledge or awareness.” United States v.
United States Gypsum Co., 438 U. S. 422, 445 (1978); see also
Tison, 481 U. S., at 150; Carter v. United States, 530 U. S.
255, 270 (2000) (describing “feloniously” as equivalent to “ `in-
tent' ”). And at the very least, there is no well-settled his-
tory showing that it is enough for a defendant to be merely
aware of some risk that their statements could be threaten-
ing. See, e. g., Borden v. United States, 593 U. S. –––, –––
(2021) (plurality opinion) (recklessness requires awareness of
a level of risk that “need not come anywhere close to a likeli-
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)              97

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

hood”). The history is, instead, replete with the enduring
and commonsense pairing of threats and intent.

                               D
   The Court, eschewing Black and history, instead reaches
its result based on the need for a “buffer zone” drawn by
analogy to other categories of unprotected speech. Ante, at
72–73. For the reasons above, I do not think we can leap
ahead to this question. With that caveat, I agree with the
Court that precedent in other areas of unprotected speech
and concerns about chilling support a subjective mens rea
requirement for true threats. Yet these same chilling con-
cerns only further buttress the conclusion that true threats
should be limited to intentionally threatening speech. In-
deed, in the concurrence by Justice Marshall that the Court
invokes, ante, at 78, he advocated “requir[ing] proof that the
speaker intended his statement to be taken as a threat,”
based on concerns about punishing “pure speech.” Rogers,
Page Proof Pending Publication
422 U. S., at 47–48. In determining the appropriate mens
rea, the Court analogizes to three categories of traditionally
unprotected speech: incitement, obscenity, and defamation.
None of these warrants expanding the narrow boundaries of
true threats.
                              1
   Speech inciting harm is the closest cousin to speech threat-
ening harm. Both incitement and threats put other people
at risk, and both “sprin[g] from [Justice] Holmes's `clear and
present danger' test.” G. Blakey & B. Murray, Threats,
Free Speech, and the Jurisprudence of the Federal Criminal
Law, 2002 B. Y. U. L. Rev. 829, 1069 (2002). Like true
threats, incitement's scope is defned in terms of both inten-
tion and effect, covering speech “[1] intended to produce, and
[2] likely to produce, imminent disorder.” Hess v. Indiana,
414 U. S. 105, 109 (1973) (per curiam).
   Despite their similar nature and source, the Court today
draws a hard line between the two. Incitement requires
98                  COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

“ `inten[t].' ” Ante, at 76. While for threats, the speaker
need only be “aware that others could regard his statements
as threatening violence and delive[r] them anyway.” Ante,
at 79 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court justi-
fes this asymmetry by the idea “that incitement to disorder
is commonly a hair's-breadth away from political `advocacy,' ”
ante, at 81, and the lead dissent says much the same,
post, at 112–113 (opinion of Barrett, J.). These opinions
offer little basis for distinguishing threats on this ground, as
this Court's own cases show time and again how true-threats
prosecutions sweep in political speech. See Black, 538 U. S.,
at 348–349; Watts, 394 U. S., at 707 (antiwar protest); Rogers,
422 U. S., at 41–42 (Marshall, J., concurring) (opposition
to Nixon's policies toward China).6 Not only that, but in-
citement itself is often only a hair's-breadth away from
threats.
   Take the seminal incitement case NAACP v. Claiborne
Hardware Co., 458 U. S. 886 (1982). During a civil rights
Page Proof Pending Publication
boycott, NAACP leader Charles Evers, brother of the mur-
dered civil rights hero Medgar Evers, gave a series of heated
speeches. See id., at 898–902. He intoned that “boycott vi-
olators would be `disciplined' ” and that “ `[i]f we catch any of
you going in any of them racist stores, we're gonna break
your damn neck.' ” Id., at 902. The Court acknowledged
that in this charged context, these speeches “might have
been understood as inviting an unlawful form of discipline
or, at least, as intending to create a fear of violence.” Id.,
at 927. Yet infammatory and threatening as these speeches
were, they did not constitute incitement. That was because

  6
    Nor is this limited to decisions by this Court. Threats cases sweep in
political speech. See, e. g., State v. Taylor, 379 N. C. 589, 590, 866 S. E.
2d 740, 744 (2021). Incitement cases can sweep in nonpolitical speech.
See, e. g., Rice v. Paladin Enterprises, Inc., 128 F. 3d 233, 264, n. 11, 267
(CA4 1997). And still other cases show how incitement and threats can
often go hand in hand. See, e. g., State v. Caroll, 456 N. J. Super. 520,
544–545, 196 A. 3d 106, 120–121 (App. Div. 2018).
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)            99

                   Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

“there [was] no evidence—apart from the speeches them-
selves—that Evers authorized, ratifed, or directly threat-
ened acts of violence.” Id., at 929. His speeches were thus
not “ `directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless ac-
tion' ” and he had not “specifcally intended to further an
unlawful goal.” Id., at 925, n. 68, 928.
   Under a recklessness rule, Claiborne would have come out
the other way. So long as Evers had some subjective aware-
ness of some risk that a reasonable person could regard his
statements as threatening, that would be suffcient. It
would be quite troubling indeed to adopt a rule rendering
this Court's admirable defense of the First Amendment
wrongly decided. Nor is Claiborne the only example. The
foundational incitement case, Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S.
444 (1969) (per curiam), extended First Amendment protec-
tions to armed Klan members uttering racial slurs, a warning
that “there might have to be some revengeance taken,” and
Page Proof Pending Publication
plans for a “ `four hundred thousand strong' ” march in two
cities. Id., at 446. Then, as now, there would be at least
some risk that a reasonable resident of those cities could
feel threatened.
   These concrete examples illustrate a more general princi-
ple. Speech inciting imminent and dangerous unlawful ac-
tivity will reasonably be threatening to those who would be
harmed by that illegality. In all such cases, whether semi-
nal decisions by this Court or guilty pleas that barely see
the inside of a courtroom, the Court's decision effectively
downgrades to recklessness the mens rea required for incite-
ment of unlawful force; prosecutors could now simply charge
such offenses as true threats. This is particularly worri-
some because the standard for recklessness decreases the
lower the “social utility” of the conduct. 1 W. LaFave, Sub-
stantive Criminal Law § 5.4(f) (3d ed. 2018). That is a trou-
bling standard for juries in a polarized nation to apply in
cases involving heated political speech. This collateral dam-
age can be avoided, however, if intent to threaten is under-
100                  COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

stood as part of a true threat, just like intent to incite is part
of incitement.
                                 2
  While obscenity is a step further afeld of true threats and
incitement, examination of this Court's obscenity case law
further supports an intent requirement for prosecutions of
true threats.
  The Constitution “ `requires proof of scienter' ” in part “ `to
compensate for the ambiguities inherent in the defnition of
obscenity.' ” Hamling v. United States, 418 U. S. 87, 123
(1974). This is in line with this Court's more general ob-
servation that “vagueness” of “content-based regulation of
speech” is of “special concern” when it comes to “criminal
statute[s].” Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521
U. S. 844, 871–872 (1997).7
  Specifcally, the Court has held that a “knowledge” mens
rea is suffcient for obscenity: “It is constitutionally suffcient
Page Proof Pending Publication
that the prosecution show that a defendant had knowledge
of the contents of the materials he distributed, and that he
knew the character and nature of the materials.” Hamling,
418 U. S., at 123. This ensures that “not innocent but calcu-
lated purveyance of flth . . . is exorcised.” Id., at 122 (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). While the Court today as-
serts that this Court has “never determined the precise
mens rea” for obscenity, ante, at 82, n. 6, the Court has cited
a knowledge standard approvingly for half a century, see
Hamling, 418 U. S., at 123; Elonis, 575 U. S., at 739.8
  7
     Analogously, the Court's civil defamation case law recognizes that
heightened liability can require a heightened mens rea; even as to nonpub-
lic fgures, a higher standard must be met for punitive damages in certain
cases. See, e. g., Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 349–350 (1974).
   8
     The Court has held, however, that recklessness is suffcient for child
pornography. See Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U. S. 103, 115 (1990). This Court
has emphasized time and again how child pornography is “a special case”
because “[t]he market for child pornography [is] `intrinsically related' to
the underlying abuse” and thus “ `an integral part of the production of
such materials, an activity illegal throughout the Nation.' ” United States
                          Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                          101

                           Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

Applying that standard to threats, the “ `calculated purvey-
ance' of a threat would require that [a defendant] know the
threatening nature of his communication.” Id., at 739.
   The considerations that drove this Court to approve a
higher mens rea for obscenity apply here as well. With ob-
scenity, the ambiguity comes partly from the reliance on
“ `contemporary community standards' ” to defne what is ob-
scene. Hamling, 418 U. S., at 129. Such a standard is noto-
riously amorphous, and will change a great deal between
communities and over time. The same chilling concerns
apply to true threats. A recklessness standard based on
what a reasonable person could fnd threatening will depend
on ever-shifting community norms around language and
when heated speech crosses the line from overly aggressive
to criminal. See supra, at 86–89.9

                                         3
Page       Proof
 Finally, the        Pending
              Court relies heavily uponPublication
                                       this Court's frame-
work for defamation. Specifcally, the Court analogizes to
the “reckless disregard” standard for defamation of public
fgures or punitive damages for certain claims involving pri-

v. Stevens, 559 U. S. 460, 471 (2010) (quoting New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S.
747, 759, 761 (1982)); see also Osborne, 495 U. S., at 110–111. Child por-
nography, with its integral ties to separate criminal conduct, is not a
strong analogue for threats, which can be feeting statements in total isola-
tion from any other criminality (though it is a stronger analogy to threats
as part of an unlawful course of stalking). Yet the Court's decision today
puts child pornography on a First Amendment par with overheated politi-
cal speech or violent song lyrics.
   9
     There is a further safeguard in obscenity cases. Something is obscene
if “taken as a whole, [it] lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientifc
value.” Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 535 U. S. 564, 574
(2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). An intent requirement can
provide a similar safeguard for threats. As Virginia v. Black, 538 U. S.
343 (2003), explained, requiring intent distinguishes between speech in-
tended to intimidate and speech intended to express a political statement.
Id., at 365–366 (plurality opinion); id., at 372 (opinion of Scalia, J.).
102              COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

vate fgures. New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254,
279–280 (1964).
   Yet while civil defamation may be “the best known and
best theorized example” of unprotected speech, ante, at 76,
the same does not go for criminal prosecution of defamation.
It is true that this Court in 1964 invalidated a prosecution
for criminal libel for failing to apply the Sullivan standard,
which covers “only those false statements made with a high
degree of awareness of their probable falsity.” Garrison v.
Louisiana, 379 U. S. 64, 75 (1964). Yet the Court expressed
strong skepticism of the very concept of criminal prosecu-
tions for libel and noted the salutary trend of its “virtual
disappearance.” Id., at 69–70. The Court approvingly
cited the Model Penal Code's recommendation that criminal
libel be limited to speech likely to cause a breach of the peace
and “calculated” to do so. Id., at 70. This is not a promis-
ing theoretical springboard for determining the mens rea re-
Page Proof Pending Publication
quired to criminalize other speech.
   If the Court were correct that the Sullivan standard is
the appropriate analogy, however, then this standard should
guide how to analyze recklessness in true-threats prosecu-
tions. The generic formulation of recklessness requires that
an individual disregard a relatively unspecifed level of risk
that the harm in question will occur. See Borden, 593 U. S.,
at ––– (plurality opinion). Within that potentially broad
range, Sullivan provides a more defnite and demanding
level of risk, refecting the First Amendment concerns at
stake. The Court has “made clear that the defendant must
have made the false publication with a high degree of aware-
ness of probable falsity or must have entertained serious
doubts as to the truth.” Harte-Hanks Communications,
Inc. v. Connaughton, 491 U. S. 657, 667 (1989) (internal quo-
tation marks and ellipsis omitted). This makes sense.
Allowing liability for awareness of a small chance that a
story may be false would undermine the very shield Sulli-
van erects.
                        Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     103

                         Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

  For similar reasons, after today's ruling, future courts
grappling with how to articulate the appropriate level of
recklessness in true-threats cases would be well served to
consult the Sullivan standard. The equivalent to Sullivan
for true threats would require a high degree of awareness
that a statement was probably threatening or serious doubts
as to the threatening nature of the statement. This could
avoid the chilling that would arise from a more amorphous
and easily satisfed standard.

                                     4
  This Court's various frameworks for unprotected speech
do not speak with one voice, as perhaps befts the First
Amendment. The above survey does not, however, give
reason to depart from the traditional understanding of true
threats. To the contrary, this case law supports keeping
true threats within their traditional bounds. Incitement
Page Proof Pending Publication
similarly requires intent. The same chilling concerns that
have led this Court to approve a knowledge requirement for
obscenity are present with true threats. And to the extent
the civil defamation context is relevant, at the very least, it
points to a precise and demanding form of recklessness.10

  10
     The lead dissent headlines its analysis by pointing to this Court's case
law on “fghting words.” Post, at 109 (opinion of Barrett, J.). This is
an unlikely candidate for a broader theory of the First Amendment. For
“nearly three-quarters of a century . . . the Court has never . . . upheld a
fghting words conviction” and “[t]he cumulative impact of [the Court's]
decisions is to make it unlikely that a fghting words law could survive.”
E. Chemerinsky, The First Amendment 1094 (6th ed. 2019). It is not hard
to see why such convictions would be unlikely to pass First Amendment
muster; the leading case involved a Jehovah's Witness distributing litera-
ture who was arrested for breach of the peace for calling a public offcial
a “ `damned Fascist.' ” Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 569,
573–574 (1942). Drawing upon a conviction like the one in Chaplinksy as
the proper model for criminalizing political speech is proof itself of the
serious risks with the lead dissent's approach. In any event, as to the
question at hand, when such breach of the peace offenses involved threats,
104                COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Opinion of Sotomayor, J.

                                 IV
   Maintaining true threats doctrine within its traditional
boundaries will guard against the overcriminalization of a
wide range of political, artistic, and everyday speech based
on its content alone. This does not mean that unintention-
ally threatening communications are exempt from regula-
tion, far from it. As explained above, there are far fewer
First Amendment concerns with stalking laws that punish
repeated, targeted, unwanted conduct and accompanying
speech. For that reason, recklessness is quite suffcient.
As to true threats, intent is neither an unusual nor an insur-
mountable bar. “[C]ourts and juries every day pass upon
knowledge, belief and intent . . . having before them no more
than evidence of . . . words and conduct, from which, in ordi-
nary human experience, mental condition can be inferred.”
American Communications Assn. v. Douds, 339 U. S. 382,
411 (1950).
Page Proof Pending Publication
                          *    *     *
   I agree with the Court's conclusion that the First Amend-
ment requires a subjective mens rea in true-threats cases,
and I also agree that recklessness is amply suffcient for this
case. Yet I would stop there, leaving for another day the
question of the specifc mens rea required to prosecute true
threats generally. If that question is reached, however, the
answer is that true threats encompass a narrow band of in-
tentional threats. Especially in a climate of intense polar-
ization, it is dangerous to allow criminal prosecutions for
heated words based solely on an amorphous recklessness
standard. Our society has often concluded that an intent
standard sets a proper balance between safety and the need
for a guilty mind, even in cases that do not involve the First
Amendment. Surely when the power of the State is called

intent to threaten was required. See 2 R. Anderson, Wharton's Criminal
Law and Procedure § 803, pp. 659–660 (1957).
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)           105

                     Thomas, J., dissenting

upon to imprison someone based on the content of their
words alone, this standard cannot be considered excessive.
Because I part ways with the Court on this score, I respect-
fully concur only in part and in the judgment.

  Justice Thomas, dissenting.
   I join Justice Barrett's dissent in full. I write sepa-
rately to address the majority's surprising and misplaced re-
liance on New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254
(1964). In New York Times, this Court held that the First
Amendment bars public fgures from recovering damages for
defamation unless they can show that the statement at issue
was made with “ `actual malice'—that is, with knowledge
that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it
was false or not.” Id., at 280. Like the majority's decision
today, “New York Times and the Court's decisions extending
it were policy-driven decisions masquerading as constitu-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tional law.” McKee v. Cosby, 586 U. S. –––, ––– (2019)
(Thomas, J., concurring in denial of certiorari). Instead of
simply applying the First Amendment as it was understood
at the time of the Founding, “the Court fashioned its own
` “federal rule[s]” ' by balancing the `competing values at
stake in defamation suits.' ” Ibid. (quoting Gertz v. Robert
Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 334, 348 (1974)); see also Bose
Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc., 466 U. S.
485, 501–502 (1984) (acknowledging that “the rule enunciated
in the New York Times case” is “largely a judge-made rule
of law,” the “content” of which is “given meaning through
the evolutionary process of common-law adjudication”).
“The constitutional libel rules adopted by this Court in New
York Times and its progeny broke sharply from the common
law of libel, and there are sound reasons to question whether
the First and Fourteenth Amendments displaced this body
of common law.” McKee, 586 U. S., at ––– (opinion of
Thomas, J.). Thus, as I have previously noted, “[w]e should
106               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Barrett, J., dissenting

reconsider our jurisprudence in this area.” Id., at –––; see
also Berisha v. Lawson, 594 U. S. ––– (2021) (Thomas, J.,
dissenting from denial of certiorari).
   I am far from alone. Many Members of this Court have
questioned the soundness of New York Times and its numer-
ous extensions. See, e. g., Berisha, 594 U. S., at ––– – –––
(Gorsuch, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Coughlin
v. Westinghouse Broadcasting & Cable, Inc., 476 U. S. 1187
(1986) (Burger, C. J., joined by Rehnquist, J., dissenting from
denial of certiorari); Gertz, 418 U. S., at 370 (White, J., dis-
senting); Rosenbloom v. Metromedia, Inc., 403 U. S. 29, 62
(1971) (Harlan, J., dissenting); id., at 78 (Marshall, J., dissent-
ing); Rosenblatt v. Baer, 383 U. S. 75, 92 (1966) (Stewart, J.,
concurring); see also E. Kagan, A Libel Story: Sullivan Then
and Now, 18 L. & Soc. Inquiry 197, 207 (1993); J. Lewis &
B. Ottley, New York Times v. Sullivan at 50, 64 DePaul L.
Rev. 1, 35–36 (2014) (collecting statements from Justice
Scalia); cf. Tah v. Global Witness Publishing, Inc., 991 F. 3d
Page Proof Pending Publication
231, 251–256 (CADC 2021) (Silberman, J., dissenting in part)
(questioning the doctrine). It is thus unfortunate that the
majority chooses not only to prominently and uncritically in-
voke New York Times, but also to extend its fawed, policy-
driven First Amendment analysis to true threats, a separate
area of this Court's jurisprudence.

  Justice Barrett, with whom Justice Thomas joins,
dissenting.
  Billy Counterman was convicted under a Colorado law that
prohibits true threats. As everyone agrees, the statute re-
quires that the speaker understand the meaning of his
words. Ante, at 72, n. 1. The question is what more the
First Amendment requires. Colorado maintains that an ob-
jective standard is enough—that is, the government must
show that a reasonable person would regard the statement
as a threat of violence. Counterman, however, argues that
the First Amendment requires a subjective test—that is, the
                        Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                     107

                          Barrett, J., dissenting

speaker himself must intend or know the threatening nature
of the statement.
  It should be easy to choose between these positions. True
threats do not enjoy First Amendment protection, and
nearly every other category of unprotected speech may be
restricted using an objective standard. Nonetheless, the
Court adopts a subjective standard, though not quite the one
advanced by Counterman. The Court holds that speakers
must recklessly disregard the threatening nature of their
speech to lose constitutional protection. Because this un-
justifably grants true threats preferential treatment, I re-
spectfully dissent.
                              I
   Since the founding, the First Amendment has allowed the
government to regulate certain “areas of speech” “because
of their constitutionally proscribable content.” R. A. V. v.
St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 382–383 (1992) (emphasis deleted).
Page Proof Pending Publication
This includes true threats, which are “serious expression[s]
of an intent to commit an act of unlawful violence to a partic-
ular individual or group of individuals.” Virginia v. Black,
538 U. S. 343, 359 (2003); see also R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 388
(“[T]hreats of violence are outside the First Amendment”).
True threats carry little value and impose great cost. See
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 572 (1942)
(“[A]ny beneft that may be derived from [true threats] is
clearly outweighed by the social interest in order and moral-
ity”). “[B]y their very utterance,” true threats “infict in-
jury.” Ibid. They provoke “the fear of violence,” create
“disruption,” give rise to “the possibility that the threatened
violence will occur”—and the list goes on. Black, 538 U. S.,
at 360 (internal quotation marks omitted).1
  1
    Indeed, the Colorado Legislature considered these very harms when it
enacted the statute at issue here. The statutory fndings explain that
stalking, harassment, and threats have “an immediate and long-lasting im-
pact on quality of life as well as risks to security and safety of the victim
and persons close to the victim.” Colo. Rev. Stat. §§ 18–3–601(1)(f), 18–
108                 COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                         Barrett, J., dissenting

  The nature of a true threat points to an objective test for
determining the scope of First Amendment protection: Nei-
ther its “social value” nor its potential for “injury” depends
on the speaker's subjective intent. Chaplinsky, 315 U. S., at
572. They can relate, of course—a speaker who does not
intend to threaten is less likely to utter a statement that
could be taken that way. But the Constitution ultimately
declines to protect true threats for objective reasons, not
subjective ones. So an objective test “complements the
explanation for excluding threats of violence from First
Amendment protection in the frst place.” United States v.
Jeffries, 692 F. 3d 473, 480 (CA6 2012).

                                    II
  The Court agrees that “[t]he existence of a threat depends
not on `the mental state of the author,' but on `what the
statement conveys' to the person on the other end.” Ante,
Page Proof Pending Publication
at 74. And it acknowledges that “[w]hen the statement is
understood as a true threat, all the harms that have long
made threats unprotected naturally follow.” Ibid. None-
theless, the Court holds Colorado's statute unconstitutional.
Why? Because the Court installs a prophylactic buffer zone
to avoid chilling protected speech—a buffer zone that pro-
tects true threats unless the speaker “consciously disre-
garded a substantial risk that his communications would be
viewed as threatening violence.” Ante, at 69, 72–73. That
reasoning is fawed.
                             A
  The Court's frst error is awarding true threats “pride of
place among unprotected speech.” Elonis v. United States,
575 U. S. 723, 767 (2015) (Thomas, J., dissenting). We have

3–602(1) (2022). So the legislature passed the statute to “encourag[e] and
authoriz[e] effective intervention” before the covered conduct could “esca-
late into behavior that has even more serious consequences.” § 18–3–
601(2).
                    Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)             109

                     Barrett, J., dissenting

held that nearly every category of unprotected speech may
be regulated using an objective test. In concluding other-
wise, the Court neglects certain cases and misreads others.
   Start with fghting words—a category of unprotected
speech that the Court skips past. Fighting words are “per-
sonally abusive epithets” that are “inherently likely to pro-
voke violent reaction.” Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15,
20 (1971). Under our precedent, legislatures may regulate
fghting words even when the speaker does not intend to
provoke the listener (or does not recklessly disregard that
possibility). Chaplinsky, 315 U. S., at 572–573 (rejecting
First Amendment challenge to a state law punishing “fght-
ing words” according to a reasonable-person standard); Cant-
well v. Connecticut, 310 U. S. 296, 309–310 (1940) (statements
unprotected when they are “likely to provoke violence and
disturbance of good order, even though no such eventuality
be intended”). Instead, we ask only whether “the ordinary
Page Proof Pending Publication
citizen,” using her “common knowledge,” would reasonably
understand the statement as a “direct personal insult.”
Cohen, 403 U. S., at 20; see also Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S.
397, 409 (1989).
   The Court similarly overlooks the category of “false, de-
ceptive, or misleading” commercial speech. Zauderer v. Of-
fce of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio, 471
U. S. 626, 638 (1985); In re R. M. J., 455 U. S. 191, 203 (1982)
(“Truthful advertising . . . is entitled to the protections of
the First Amendment,” but “[m]isleading advertising may be
prohibited entirely”); Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business
and Professional Regulation, Bd. of Accountancy, 512 U. S.
136, 142 (1994) (“[F]alse, deceptive, or misleading commercial
speech may be banned”). Here, too, our cases suggest that
First Amendment protection depends on objective falsity
rather than the speaker's intention. See In re R. M. J., 455
U. S., at 202 (“[R]egulation—and imposition of discipline—
are permissible where the particular advertising is inher-
ently likely to deceive or where the record indicates that a
110              COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Barrett, J., dissenting

particular form or method of advertising has in fact been
deceptive” (emphasis added)); see also Milavetz, Gallop &
Milavetz, P. A. v. United States, 559 U. S. 229, 250–253
(2010). Thus, the government is “free to prevent the dis-
semination of commercial speech that is false, deceptive, or
misleading,” without regard to whether the speaker knew
that the recipient would be deceived or misled. Zauderer,
471 U. S., at 638.
   Or take obscenity, which we have long held is “not pro-
tected by the freedoms of speech and press. ” Roth v.
United States, 354 U. S. 476, 481 (1957). Speech qualifes
as obscene if the “ `average person, applying contemporary
community standards,' ” would conclude that “the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest.” Miller
v. California, 413 U. S. 15, 24 (1973). The jury must also
make an objective judgment about whether the speech “de-
picts or describes” sexual conduct “in a patently offensive
Page Proof Pending Publication
way,” and whether it “lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientifc value.” Ibid. The speaker's “ `belief as to the
obscenity or non-obscenity of the material is irrelevant.' ”
Hamling v. United States, 418 U. S. 87, 120–121 (1974). So
long as the defendant has “knowledge of the contents of the
materials,” her speech may be constitutionally regulated.
Id., at 123. An objective, reasonable-person standard
applies.
   In an effort to bolster its position, the Court foats a differ-
ent standard for obscenity laws, asserting that “the First
Amendment demands proof of a defendant's mindset to make
out an obscenity case.” Ante, at 76. By “mindset,” the
Court apparently means that the defendant must have some
awareness that an average person would consider the mate-
rials obscene. But the Court draws this conclusion from
cases rejecting a strict liability standard—for example, we
have held that the proprietor of a bookstore cannot be liable
for possessing an obscene book unless he knew what was in
it. Smith v. California, 361 U. S. 147, 149, 155 (1959); Mish-
                         Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                      111

                          Barrett, J., dissenting

kin v. New York, 383 U. S. 502, 510–512 (1966); see also Gins-
berg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629, 643–644 (1968).2 Knowing
what the material depicts is not the same as knowing how
the average person would react to it—just as there is an
important difference between Counterman's knowledge of
what his words meant and his knowledge of how they would
be perceived. Though the Court confates the two, our ob-
scenity cases have repeatedly refused to require the latter
as a matter of constitutional law. Hamling, 418 U. S., at
120–123; Rosen v. United States, 161 U. S. 29, 41–42 (1896).
So obscenity doctrine does not help Counterman.
   The Court leans hardest on defamation law, but its argu-
ment depends on a single, cherry-picked strand of the doc-
trine. Yes, New York Times Co. v. Sullivan requires public
fgures and public offcials to show “actual malice” on a defa-
mation claim, and we have defned “actual malice” as “knowl-
edge that [the statement] was false” or “reckless disregard
Page Proof Pending Publication
of whether it was false or not.” 376 U. S. 254, 279–280
(1964). But that is not the full story. A private person
need only satisfy an objective standard to recover actual
damages for defamation. Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418
U. S. 323, 347–350 (1974). And if the defamatory speech
does not involve a matter of public concern, she may recover
punitive damages with the same showing. Dun & Brad-
street, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U. S. 749, 760–
761 (1985) (plurality opinion). We have justifed that dis-
tinction on the ground that public-fgure defamation claims
may deter “would-be critics of offcial conduct . . . from voic-

   2
     The Court also cites Elonis v. United States, ante, at 76, 77, n. 4, which
Counterman argues puts a “gloss” on obscenity doctrine, Tr. of Oral Arg.
6–7. While Elonis briefy discusses the necessary mens rea for a convic-
tion under a federal obscenity statute, it does so only in dicta. 575 U. S.
723, 739–740 (2015). Elonis does not alter the doctrinal framework for
assessing the constitutionality of obscenity laws: That case involves true
threats, not obscenity, and it interprets a federal statute, not the
Constitution.
112             COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                    Barrett, J., dissenting

ing their criticism,” which would “dampe[n] the vigor and
limit the variety of public debate.” Sullivan, 376 U. S., at
279. Not only that, but “the state interest in protecting”
public fgures is weaker, since they tend to “enjoy signif-
cantly greater access to the channels of effective communica-
tion and hence have a more realistic opportunity to counter-
act false statements.” Gertz, 418 U. S., at 344. So, despite
what the Court says, Sullivan does not stand for the broad
proposition that the First Amendment “demand[s] a subjec-
tive mental-state requirement.” Ante, at 75. Instead, it
simply raises the bar for borderline unprotected speech with
high social value (because of its proximity to public dis-
course) and low potential for injury (because public fgures
can engage in counterspeech).
   Sullivan's rationale does not justify a heightened mens
rea for true threats. Because true threats are not typically
proximate to debate on matters of public concern, the Court's
Page Proof Pending Publication
newly erected buffer zone does not serve the end of protect-
ing heated political commentary. Nor can public fgures use
counterspeech in the public square to protect themselves
from serious threats of physical violence. And perversely,
private individuals now have less protection from true
threats than from defamation—even though they presum-
ably value their lives more than their reputations. See
Gertz, 418 U. S., at 347–350. The Court has therefore ex-
tended Sullivan in a way that makes no sense on Sullivan's
own terms.
   I will give the Court this much: Speakers must specifcally
intend to incite violence before they lose First Amendment
protection. Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444, 447 (1969)
(per curiam) (defning incitement as “advocacy . . . directed
to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and likely
to incite or produce such action”); see also Hess v. Indiana,
414 U. S. 105, 108–109 (1973) (per curiam). Once more, how-
ever, our precedent itself explains the difference. Incite-
ment, as a form of “advocacy,” often arises in the political
                    Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)              113

                      Barrett, J., dissenting

arena. See Brandenburg, 395 U. S., at 447 (Ku Klux Klan
rally held to plan a “ `marc[h] on Congress' ”); Hess, 414 U. S.,
at 106 (antiwar demonstration); Abrams v. United States,
250 U. S. 616, 620 (1919) (pamphlets about the President's
“ `shameful, cowardly silence about the intervention in Rus-
sia' ”). A specifc intent requirement helps draw the line be-
tween incitement and “political rhetoric lying at the core of
the First Amendment.” NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware
Co., 458 U. S. 886, 926–927 (1982). The Court does not con-
tend that targeted threats and political commentary share a
similarly close relationship.
   In sum, our First Amendment precedent does not set a
“ban on an objective standard.” Ante, at 78. Precedent
does more than allow an objective test for true threats; on
balance, it affrmatively supports one.

                                 B

Page       Proof
  The Court's analysisPending
                      also gives short Publication
                                       shrift to how an ob-
jective test works in practice. Two key features of true
threats already guard against the risk of silencing protected
speech. Thus, there is no need to go further and adopt the
Court's heightened standard.
  First, only a very narrow class of statements satisfes the
defnition of a true threat. To make a true threat, the speaker
must express “an intent to commit an act of unlawful vio-
lence.” Black, 538 U. S., at 359 (emphasis added). Speech
that is merely “offensive,” “ `poorly chosen,' ” or “unpopular”
does not qualify. Brief for Petitioner 31, 36, 42. The state-
ment must also threaten violence “to a particular individual or
group of individuals”—not just in general. Black, 538 U. S.,
at 359. These tight guardrails distinguish true threats from
public-fgure defamation, the model for the Court's rule.
While defamatory statements can cover an infnite number
of topics, true threats target one: unlawful violence.
  Second, the statement must be deemed threatening by a
reasonable listener who is familiar with the “entire factual
114                 COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                         Barrett, J., dissenting

context” in which the statement occurs. State v. Taveras,
342 Conn. 563, 572, 271 A. 3d 123, 129 (2022). This inquiry
captures (among other things) the speaker's tone, the audi-
ence, the medium for the communication, and the broader
exchange in which the statement occurs.3 Each consider-
ation helps weed out protected speech from true threats.
   Our decision in Black illustrates the point. There, the
Court considered a Virginia law that prohibited cross burn-
ing “ `with the intent of intimidating any person or group of
persons.' ” 538 U. S., at 348. Notably, the statute included
a presumption: “ `Any such burning of a cross shall be prima
facie evidence of an intent to intimidate.' ” Ibid. After
three men were convicted under the statute, they challenged
it as facially unconstitutional. We upheld the general prohi-
bition on cross burning, concluding that the First Amend-
ment allows the government to ban “a particular type of
threat.” Id., at 362–363. A plurality then went on to ad-
dress the statutory presumption. While cross burning “may
Page Proof Pending Publication
mean that a person is engaging in constitutionally proscrib-
able intimidation,” the plurality reasoned, the act is not mo-
nolithic. Id., at 365. Cross burning could be directed “at
an individual” or “at a group of like-minded believers”; it
could be done “on a neighbor's lawn” or “at a public rally”;
it could be done with the property owner's “permission” or
without it. Id., at 366. The presumption “blur[red] the
line” between these different situations and “ignore[d] all of
the contextual factors that are necessary to decide whether
  3
    Colorado's test provides a good example. Juries must apply the fol-
lowing nonexhaustive factors to determine whether a statement is a true
threat: “(1) the statement's role in a broader exchange, if any, including
surrounding events; (2) the medium or platform through which the state-
ment was communicated, including any distinctive conventions or architec-
tural features; (3) the manner in which the statement was conveyed (e. g.,
anonymously or not, privately or publicly); (4) the relationship between the
speaker and recipient(s); and (5) the subjective reaction of the statement's
intended or foreseeable recipient(s).” People in the Interest of R. D., 464
P. 3d 717, 721–722 (Colo. 2020).
                       Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)                    115

                         Barrett, J., dissenting

a particular cross burning” was covered by the statute or
not.4 Id., at 365, 367. Thus, the presumption was unconsti-
tutionally overbroad.
   The Black plurality's reasoning can be boiled down to the
following insight: When context is ignored, true threats can-
not be reliably distinguished from protected speech. The
reverse also holds: When context is properly considered, con-
stitutional concerns abate. See, e. g., Watts v. United States,
394 U. S. 705, 708 (1969) (per curiam) (concluding that a
statement was “political hyperbole” instead of a true threat
based on “context,” “the expressly conditional nature of the
statement,” and the “reaction of the listeners”).
   One more point: Many States have long had statutes like
Colorado's on the books. See Brief for Illinois et al. as
Amici Curiae 16–17. Before we took this case, the vast ma-
jority of Courts of Appeals and state high courts had upheld
these statutes as constitutional. So objective tests are ef-
Page Proof Pending Publication
fectively the status quo today, yet Counterman still strug-
gles to identify past prosecutions that came close to infring-
ing on protected speech. Tr. of Oral Arg. 28–30. The
silence is telling.
                              C
   So is the silence in the historical record. Since 1791, true
threats have been excluded from the “speech” protected by
the First Amendment. R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 382–383, 388.
If Counterman could show that a subjective requirement has

  4
    As Justice Sotomayor emphasizes, ante, at 92, n. 4, the plurality said
that context informs “whether a particular cross burning is intended to
intimidate,” 538 U. S., at 367 (emphasis added). But this was a reference
to the statutory requirements for a conviction, not the constitutional re-
quirements—the Virginia statute covered only threats made “ `with the
intent of intimidating any person or group of persons.' ” Id., at 348. At
no point did the Court hold that the First Amendment demands specifc
intent; on the contrary, it recognized that a statement made “with the
intent of placing the victim in fear of bodily harm or death” is “a type of
true threat.” Id., at 360 (emphasis added).
116             COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                     Barrett, J., dissenting

been inherent in the defnition of “true threat” since the
founding, he would have a compelling case. But Counter-
man cannot make that showing.
   For starters, he produces no evidence directly addressing
the meaning of the First Amendment—nothing from state
ratifying conventions, political commentary, or even early de-
bates about efforts to regulate threats in ways that might
threaten speech. That is not surprising at the federal level,
because the Federal Government did not prohibit threats
until the early 20th century. Elonis, 575 U. S., at 760
(Thomas, J., dissenting). Some States, however, both regu-
lated threats and guaranteed the right to free speech in their
own constitutions. Id., at 760–761. Yet even at the state
level, there was apparently no discussion about the implica-
tions of these statutes for the constitutional right.
   That void notwithstanding, the state threat statutes are
the evidence on which Counterman seizes. He argues that
Page Proof Pending Publication
they imposed a subjective mens rea, demonstrating that the
founding generation thought that threats could be punished
on no less. But as Justice Thomas has already discussed
in detail, this is incorrect. See id., at 760–765. Rather than
a subjective mens rea, these statutes used an objective
standard resembling Colorado's.
   Even if they did require a heightened mens rea, though,
these statutes would not carry the day for Counterman.
The enactment of a statute against the backdrop of a free
speech guarantee tends to show that the legislature thought
the statute consistent with that guarantee. Thus, if the
question were whether such statutes violated the First
Amendment, their existence would be evidence to the con-
trary. But the question here is whether a subjective intent
requirement is the constitutional foor. And because the
legislature is always free to exceed the foor, the enactment
of legislation does not necessarily refect the legislature's
view of the constitutional minimum.
                   Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)            117

                     Barrett, J., dissenting

  At the end of the day, then, the best historical case for
Counterman does not add up to much. He is plainly not ask-
ing the Court to enforce a historically sanctioned rule, but
rather to fashion a new one.

                               D
   Even if a subjective test had a historical pedigree, the
Court's chosen standard of recklessness certainly does not.
Where does recklessness come from? It was not raised by
the parties. Only the Solicitor General noted this possibil-
ity—and briefy at that. Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 28–31. Nor did the courts below address reckless-
ness; indeed, very few courts (of the many that have taken
up the question) have settled on recklessness as the constitu-
tional foor for true threats. See, e. g., State v. Mrozinski,
971 N. W. 2d 233, 243–245 (Minn. 2022); In re J. J. M., 265 A.
3d 246, 269–270 (Pa. 2021). Still, the Court adopts reckless-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ness as “the right path forward.” Ante, at 79. Its ration-
ale is, at best, unclear.
   The Court begins by acknowledging the “ `competing val-
ue[s]' ” of “free expression” on one hand, and “profound
harms . . . to both individuals and society” on the other.
Ante, at 79–80. But why do these considerations point to
recklessness? A knowledge or purpose standard would
allow more free expression, so maybe we should go higher.
See ante, at 97 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in part and con-
curring in judgment) (“chilling concerns only further but-
tress the conclusion that true threats should be limited
to intentionally threatening speech”). An objective stand-
ard would cause less harm to victims, so perhaps lower is
better. The optimal balance strikes me as a question best
left to the legislature, which could calibrate the mens rea
to the circumstance—for example, higher for the criminal
context and lower for the civil. See Brief for Illinois
et al. as Amici Curiae 28–30 (States “have a range of pol-
118               COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                      Barrett, J., dissenting

icy reasons for using subjective standards for penalizing
threats of violence” and many “choose to require proof of
a speaker's subjective mental state” in some situations but
not others).
   Nor does our First Amendment precedent buttress the
Court's preferred standard. A recklessness requirement
currently applies only to public-fgure defamation claims.
Incitement to violence calls for more. Fighting words,
private-fgure defamation, false commercial speech, and ob-
scenity require less. I fail to see why, of all these categories
of unprotected speech, public-fgure defamation is the best
analog for true threats. The reality is that recklessness is
not grounded in law, but in a Goldilocks judgment: Reckless-
ness is not too much, not too little, but instead “just right.”

                               III
   Some may fnd Colorado's statute harsh, and the Court's
Page Proof Pending Publication
decision seems driven in no small part by the heavy hammer
of criminal punishment. See ante, at 80; ante, at 96–97,
101–102 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). While an objective test
is “a familiar feature of civil liability in tort law,” the “ `con-
ventional requirement for criminal conduct' ” is “ `awareness
of some wrongdoing.' ” Elonis, 575 U. S., at 737–738. In
keeping with this convention, we generally presume that
“federal criminal statutes that are silent on the required
mental state” nonetheless impose the “mens rea which is
necessary to separate wrongful conduct from otherwise inno-
cent conduct.” Id., at 736 (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). That is why we rejected an objective standard for the
federal threat prohibition, 18 U. S. C. § 875(c). 575 U. S., at
737–739. It is “the threatening nature of the communica-
tion” that “makes the conduct `wrongful' ”; thus, the statute
is best interpreted to require that the defendant be aware of
the impact of his speech. Id., at 737.
   But this case is about the scope of the First Amendment,
not the interpretation of a criminal statute. Accordingly,
                    Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)             119

                     Barrett, J., dissenting

the Court's holding affects the civil consequences for true
threats just as much as it restricts criminal liability. And
the civil context underscores the danger of adopting a
Sullivan-style buffer zone for true threats.
   Consider, for example, threat victims who seek restraining
orders to protect themselves from their harassers. See,
e. g., United States v. Elonis, 841 F. 3d 589, 593 (CA3 2016)
(defendant's wife sought a restraining order after he wrote
on Facebook, “I'm not going to rest until your body is a mess,
soaked in blood and dying from all the little cuts”). Civil
orders can also keep individuals away from particular geo-
graphic areas. Imagine someone who threatens to bomb an
airport, State v. Johnston, 156 Wash. 2d 355, 358–359, 127
P. 3d 707, 708–709 (2006), or “shoot up [a] courthous[e],” State
v. Draskovich, 2017 S. D. 76, ¶3, 904 N. W. 2d 759, 761. The
speaker might well end up barred from the location in ques-
tion—for good reason. Yet after today, such orders cannot
Page Proof Pending Publication
be obtained without proof—not necessarily easy to secure—
that the person who issued the threat anticipated that it
would elicit fear. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 92–93.
   The government can also opt to counteract true threats by
means of civil enforcement actions. For instance, 18 U. S. C.
§ 248 prohibits “threat[s] of force” against any person “ob-
taining or providing reproductive health services” or “seek-
ing to exercise the First Amendment right of religious free-
dom at a place of religious worship.” The statute imposes
a range of civil penalties, and it allows enforcement suits
by both private persons and government offcials. See, e. g.,
United States v. Dillard, 795 F. 3d 1191, 1196–1197 (CA10
2015) (Government brought § 248 action after defendant
warned a health provider, “[y]ou will be checking under your
car everyday—because maybe today is the day someone
places an explosive under it”); McCullen v. Coakley, 573 U. S.
464, 491 (2014) (noting that several States have similar laws).
After today, these civil enforcement actions face a higher
constitutional hurdle.
120              COUNTERMAN v. COLORADO

                     Barrett, J., dissenting

   In addition, employers and school administrators often dis-
cipline individuals who make true threats. Consider the
student who was expelled after “draft[ing] two violent, miso-
gynic, and obscenity-laden rants expressing a desire to mo-
lest, rape, and murder” his ex-girlfriend. Doe v. Pulaski
Cty. Special School Dist., 306 F. 3d 616, 619 (CA8 2002)
(en banc). Or the one who was suspended after “ `talking
about taking a gun to school' to `shoot everyone he hates.' ”
D. J. M. v. Hannibal Public School Dist. No. 60, 647 F. 3d 754,
758 (CA8 2011); Lovell v. Poway Unifed School District, 90
F. 3d 367, 369, 372–373 (CA9 1996) (similar); Haughwout v.
Tordenti, 332 Conn. 559, 561–562, 211 A. 3d 1, 3–4 (2019)
(similar). True threats can also be expressed by a parent, a
teacher, or an employee in another context altogether. See,
e. g., Taveras, 342 Conn., at 567–569, 578, 271 A. 3d, at 126–
128, 133 (parent); Smith v. New York City Dept. of Ed., 109
App. Div. 3d 701, 702–703, 972 N. Y. S. 2d 221, 222 (2013)
(teacher); Diggs v. St. Louis, 613 S. W. 3d 858, 862, 864 (Mo.
Page Proof Pending Publication
App. 2020) (correctional offcer).
   Barring some reason why the speech receives lesser con-
stitutional protection, e. g., Mahanoy Area School Dist. v.
B. L., 594 U. S. –––, ––– – ––– (2021), the Court's new rule
applies to all of these situations. That can make all the
difference in some cases. A delusional speaker may lack
awareness of the threatening nature of her speech; a devious
speaker may strategically disclaim such awareness; and a
lucky speaker may leave behind no evidence of mental state
for the government to use against her. The Court's decision
thus sweeps much further than it lets on.

                         *     *      *
  The bottom line is this: Counterman communicated true
threats, which, “everyone agrees, lie outside the bounds
of the First Amendment's protection.” Ante, at 72. He
knew what the words meant. Those threats caused the vic-
tim to fear for her life, and they “upended her daily exist-
                  Cite as: 600 U. S. 66 (2023)          121

                    Barrett, J., dissenting

ence.” Ante, at 70. Nonetheless, the Court concludes that
Counterman can prevail on a First Amendment defense.
Nothing in the Constitution compels that result. I respect-
fully dissent.




Page Proof Pending Publication
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
Page Proof Pending Publication
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

None