(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

            BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL. v.
                    VANDERSTOK ET AL.

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                  THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

     No. 23–852.      Argued October 8, 2024—Decided March 26, 2025
The Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA) requires those engaged in importing,
  manufacturing, or dealing in firearms to obtain federal licenses, keep
  sales records, conduct background checks, and mark their products
  with serial numbers. The Act defines “firearm” to include “(A) any
  weapon . . . which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to
  expel a projectile by the action of an explosive; [and] (B) the frame or
  receiver of any such weapon.” 18 U. S. C. §921(a)(3). Recent years
  have witnessed profound changes in how guns are made and sold, with
  companies now able to sell weapon parts kits that individuals can as-
  semble into functional firearms at home. These kits vary widely in
  how complete they come and in how much work is required to finish
  them. Sales have grown exponentially, with law enforcement agencies
  reporting a dramatic increase in untraceable “ghost guns” used in
  crimes—from 1,600 in 2017 to more than 19,000 in 2021.
     In 2022, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
  (ATF) adopted a rule interpreting the Act to cover weapon parts kits
  that are “designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile,”
  27 CFR §478.11, and “partially complete, disassembled, or nonfunc-
  tional” frames or receivers, §478.12(c). Before ATF could enforce its
  rule, gun manufacturers and others filed what they described as a fa-
  cial challenge under the Administrative Procedure Act, arguing that
  the GCA cannot be read to reach weapon parts kits or unfinished
  frames or receivers. The District Court agreed and vacated the rule.
  The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that §921(a)(3)(A) categorically
  does not reach weapon parts kits regardless of completeness or ease of
  assembly, and that §921(a)(3)(B) reaches only finished frames and re-
  ceivers.
2                      BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                                Syllabus

Held: The ATF’s rule is not facially inconsistent with the GCA. Pp. 7–
 24.
    (a) Section 478.11’s provisions addressing weapon parts kits are not
 facially invalid under §921(a)(3)(A). That subsection contains two re-
 quirements: a “weapon” must be present, and that weapon must be
 able to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, designed to do
 so, or susceptible of ready conversion to operate that way. Some
 weapon parts kits meet that description. Consider, for instance, Poly-
 mer80’s “Buy Build Shoot” kit, which contains all necessary compo-
 nents to build a semiautomatic pistol and can be assembled in about
 20 minutes using common tools. That kit qualifies as a “weapon” be-
 cause: (1) artifact nouns like “weapon” often describe unfinished ob-
 jects when their intended function is clear, as with a disassembled ri-
 fle; (2) the statute treats starter guns as weapons though they require
 conversion work; and (3) the statutory text contemplates that some
 things short of fully operable firearms qualify as “weapons.” The kit
 also satisfies the statute’s second requirement, as it requires no more
 time, expertise, or specialized tools to complete than a starter gun,
 which the statute treats as readily convertible into a functioning fire-
 arm. While other kits may be so incomplete or cumbersome to assem-
 ble that they cannot fairly be described as weapons capable of ready
 conversion, the facial challenge fails because kits like Polymer 80’s
 clearly qualify. Pp. 7–17.
    (b) Section 478.12(c)’s treatment of partially complete frames and
 receivers is also not facially invalid under §921(a)(3)(B). Like
 “weapon,” the artifact nouns “frame” and “receiver” may describe not-
 yet-complete objects. The statute uses these terms to encompass some
 unfinished items elsewhere, as in §923(i)’s serialization requirements
 for incomplete weapons, silencers, and destructive devices. ATF has
 for decades interpreted the statute to reach some unfinished frames
 and receivers, and even the plaintiffs concede they have no “quarrel”
 with ATF’s prior practice of regulating those products. Accordingly,
 the statute authorizes ATF to regulate at least some incomplete
 frames or receivers that take minutes of work with common tools to
 complete. While other products may be so far from finished that they
 cannot fairly be described as frames or receivers, the facial challenge
 fails because the statute plainly reaches some partially complete
 items. Pp. 17–21.
    (c) The plaintiffs’ arguments about the linguistic differences be-
 tween subsections (A) and (B) and potential unintended consequences
 under the National Firearms Act (NFA) are unpersuasive. The gov-
 ernment represents that AR–15 receivers do not qualify as ma-
 chinegun receivers, and this Court’s analysis of the GCA does not sug-
 gest ATF has authority to regulate them as such under the NFA.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     3

                                Syllabus

  Pp. 21–24.
    (d) Neither the rule of lenity nor constitutional avoidance applies
  where, as here, the statute’s text, context, and structure make clear it
  reaches some weapon parts kits and unfinished frames or receivers.
  P. 24.
86 F. 4th 179, reversed and remanded.

   GORSUCH, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, KAVANAUGH, BARRETT, and JACKSON, JJ.,
joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., KAVANAUGH, J., and JACKSON, J., each filed con-
curring opinions. THOMAS, J., and ALITO, J., each filed dissenting opin-
ions.
                        Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 23–852
                                   _________________


   PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
  PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
       ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
         COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                                [March 26, 2025]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH delivered the opinion of the Court.
   For decades, the Gun Control Act has regulated the sale
of firearms. This case poses the question whether the Act’s
longstanding mandates also apply to those who make and
sell a new product—“weapon parts kits.”
                              I
                             A
   Shortly after the assassinations of Senator Robert F.
Kennedy and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. stunned the Na-
tion, Congress adopted the Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA).
Pub. L. 90–618, 82 Stat. 1213. Existing gun control
measures, Congress found, allowed criminals to acquire
largely untraceable guns too easily. See 82 Stat. 225. Of-
ten, for example, criminals could evade state laws regulat-
ing in-person sales simply by purchasing guns through the
mail. Ibid. In response, Congress adopted a number of new
mandates. As a result, many of those now engaged in im-
porting, manufacturing, or dealing in firearms must obtain
federal licenses, keep records of their sales, and conduct
background checks before transferring firearms to private
buyers. 18 U. S. C. §§922(t), 923(a), (g)(1)(A). The Act also
2                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

requires importers and manufacturers to mark their fire-
arms with serial numbers. §923(i).
   These mandates serve at least two ends. The back-
ground-check requirement seeks to keep “guns out of the
hands of criminals.” Abramski v. United States, 573 U. S.
169, 180 (2014). The licensing, recordkeeping, and seriali-
zation requirements, meanwhile, aim “to assist law enforce-
ment authorities in investigating serious crimes,” ibid., by
permitting them “to determine where, by whom, or when” a
firearm was manufactured and to whom it was “sold or oth-
erwise transferred.” 87 Fed. Reg. 24652 (2022). Today,
thousands of law-enforcement agencies nationwide depend
on the Act’s tracing system to link firearms involved in
crimes to their owners. Id., at 24659.
   The GCA’s mandates apply to “firearm[s].” See §§922(t),
923(a), (i). And the law defines that key term broadly. Un-
der §921(a)(3), a “firearm” includes “(A) any weapon (in-
cluding a starter gun) which will or is designed to or may
readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an
explosive; (B) the frame or receiver of any such weapon; (C)
any firearm muffler or firearm silencer; or (D) any destruc-
tive device.” Thanks to this generous definition, the GCA
has long been understood to reach everything from run-of-
the-mill rifles to novelty umbrella guns. See Novelty Guns,
ATF (June 5, 2015), https://www.atf.gov/firearms/photo-
gallery-0.
   Recent years, however, have witnessed profound changes
in how guns are made and sold. When Congress adopted
the GCA in 1968, “the milling equipment, materials needed,
and designs were far too expensive for individuals to make
firearms practically or reliably on their own.” 87 Fed. Reg.
24688. With the introduction of new technologies like 3D
printing and reinforced polymers, that is no longer true.
Today, companies are able to make and sell weapon parts
kits that individuals can assemble into functional firearms
in their own homes. Ibid.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                      Opinion of the Court

   These kits vary widely both in how complete they come
and in how much work is required to finish them. At one
end of the spectrum, a kit may lack essential parts and “re-
quir[e] substantial effort, specialized expertise, uncommon
equipment, and a significant amount of time” before anyone
can fire a shot. Brief for Former Acting Chief of ATF Fire-
arms Technology Branch et al. as Amici Curiae 35. At the
other end, some kits “contain all components necessary” for
“a complete pistol” and can be completed in perhaps half an
hour using commonly available tools. App. to Pet. for Cert.
236a.
   Sales of these kits have grown “exponential[ly].” Brief for
Petitioners 2. Home hobbyists enjoy assembling them.
VanDerStock v. Garland, 86 F. 4th 179, 185 (CA5 2023).
But criminals also find them attractive. Id., at 195. That
is largely due to how the kits are sold. Some manufacturers
and dealers take the position that weapon parts kits do not
qualify as “firearms” subject to the GCA. As a result, they
say, they are free to sell their products without obtaining a
federal license, conducting background checks, maintaining
sales records, or marking components with serial numbers.
87 Fed. Reg. 24652.
   The upshot? “[P]olice departments around the Nation”
have “confronted an explosion of crimes” involving these
“ghost guns.” Brief for Petitioners 8. In 2017, law-enforce-
ment agencies submitted about 1,600 ghost guns to the fed-
eral government for tracing. App. to Pet. for Cert. 194a. By
2021, that number jumped to more than 19,000. Ibid. Ef-
forts to trace the ownership of these weapons, the govern-
ment represents, have proven “almost entirely futile.” Brief
for Petitioners 8.
                             B
   In 2022, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives adopted a new rule designed to combat the pro-
liferation of ghost guns. See 87 Fed. Reg. 24652. In doing
4                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

so, the agency invoked authority Congress granted it to pre-
scribe “rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out”
the GCA. 18 U. S. C. §926(a). Two provisions in the
agency’s new rule are of special relevance here.
   The first addresses weapon parts kits directly. Recall
that §921(a)(3) extends the GCA’s mandates to “firearms,”
a term subsection (A) defines as “any weapon (including a
starter gun) which will or is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.”
In its new rule, ATF interpreted this language to embrace
weapon parts kits “that [are] designed to or may readily be
completed, assembled, restored, or otherwise converted to
expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.” 27 CFR
§478.11 (2023) (defining “firearm”). Those who make or sell
kits that satisfy this test, ATF said, must comply with the
GCA by securing federal licenses, conducting background
checks, keeping sales records, and marking their products
with serial numbers. To decide whether a kit “may readily
be converted” into a working gun, ATF added, it will con-
sider several factors, including the time, ease, expertise,
and equipment required to complete a weapon, as well as
the availability of other necessary parts. Ibid. (defining
“readily”).
   The second relevant aspect of the agency’s new rule con-
cerns a key building block of almost any firearm: its frame
or receiver. Under subsection (B) of §921(a)(3), “the frame
or receiver of any such weapon” covered by subsection (A) is
itself treated as a “firearm.” Effectively, that means a
frame or receiver is, even when sold separately, subject to
the Act’s requirements. Presumably, Congress singled out
these components for special treatment because of the spe-
cial role they play in constructing firearms. As the govern-
ment put it in 1968, a frame or receiver is “[t]hat part . . .
which provides housing for the hammer, bolt or breech-
block, and firing mechanism, and which is usually threaded
at its forward portion to receive the barrel.” 33 Fed. Reg.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    5

                          Opinion of the Court

18558; accord, 43 Fed. Reg. 13537 (1978) (formerly codified
at 27 CFR §478.11 (2020)).
   In its 2022 rule, ATF sought to expand this definition.
Now, the agency said, a “frame or receiver” subject to sub-
section (B) of §921(a)(3), should be understood to encompass
as well “a partially complete, disassembled, or nonfunc-
tional frame or receiver, including a frame or receiver parts
kit, that is designed to or may readily be completed, assem-
bled, restored, or otherwise converted to function as a frame
or receiver.” 27 CFR §478.12(c) (defining “frame or re-
ceiver”). Still, ATF stressed, the Act and its new rule have
their limits. They do not apply until an object has “reached
a stage of manufacture where it is clearly identifiable as an
unfinished component part of a weapon.” Ibid. So, for ex-
ample, “[a] forging, casting, printing, extrusion, unma-
chined body, or similar article” does not count. Ibid. 1
                              C
   Before ATF’s new rule took effect and ATF could begin
efforts to enforce its new rule, various gun manufacturers,
at-home gunsmiths, and others filed what they described as
a “facial” challenge under the Administrative Procedure Act
(APA). See, e.g., BlackHawk Mfg. Complaint in No. 22–619
(ND Tex., Oct. 20, 2022), ECF Doc. 99, p. 25. They argued
that the GCA cannot be fairly read to reach weapon parts
kits or unfinished frames or receivers. As a result, the
plaintiffs contended, ATF’s regulations in §478.11 and
§478.12(c) purporting to extend the GCA’s mandates to
——————
  1 Besides these changes, ATF’s new rule included a number of others.

For instance, where the agency’s old regulations defined frames and re-
ceivers as those parts housing all of a firearm’s key components, 43 Fed.
Reg. 13537, ATF’s new rule redefined those terms to include parts hous-
ing only some key components, see 27 CFR §478.12(a)(1), (a)(2). But be-
cause the plaintiffs did not challenge that amendment or others in pro-
ceedings below, see Brief for Respondent VanDerStok 31, n. 4, we have
no occasion to pass upon them, see Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S. 709,
718, n. 7 (2005).
6                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

these products could not be enforced against anyone and
had to be “set aside” as impermissibly issued “in excess of
statutory . . . authority.” 5 U. S. C. §706.
   At summary judgment, the district court agreed with the
plaintiffs and vacated the agency’s new rule. VanDerStok
v. Garland, 680 F. Supp. 3d 741, 766 (ND Tex. 2023). On
appeal, the Fifth Circuit largely affirmed. The court
acknowledged that subsection (A) of §921(a)(3) authorizes
ATF to regulate “weapons” that “may readily be converted
to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.” But, the
court reasoned, that language does not reach weapon parts
kits. Nor does it matter how complete a kit may come or
how easily it may be assembled. As a categorical matter,
the court held, the Act reaches none of them. 86 F. 4th, at
195. The Fifth Circuit offered a similar assessment when
it came to unfinished frames and receivers. Subsection (B)
of §921(a)(3) permits the agency to regulate “the frame or
receiver of any such weapon” covered by subsection (A).
But, the court held, those terms do not speak to, and thus
do not allow the agency to regulate, unfinished frames and
receivers, no matter how close to completion they may be.
Id., at 190. For these reasons, the court of appeals con-
cluded, the provisions in ATF’s new rule addressing weapon
parts kits, §478.11, and unfinished frames and receivers,
§478.12(c), were facially inconsistent with GCA and thus
had to be “set aside” consistent with the APA, 86 F. 4th, at
195.
   The government sought review in this Court. Our inter-
vention was necessary, the government insisted, because
the court of appeals had “adopted an interpretation of the
Act that would effectively nullify its central provisions” and
leave criminals today nearly as free to obtain “untraceable
firearms” as they were before the Act’s adoption in 1968.
Pet. for Cert. 28. We agreed to hear the case. 601 U. S. ___
(2024).
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     7

                          Opinion of the Court

                               II
   As presented to us, this case does not ask us to resolve
whether ATF’s new regulations in §478.11 and §478.12 may
be lawfully applied to particular weapon parts kits or un-
finished frames or receivers. Instead, the plaintiffs have
pursued what the lower courts called a “facial” pre-enforce-
ment challenge to the agency’s authority to regulate any
weapon parts kits or unfinished frames or receivers. 680
F. Supp. 3d, at 766; 86 F. 4th, at 186. In a challenge like
that, the government represents, “the possibility that
[ATF’s regulation] may be invalid as applied’ in some cases
‘does not mean that the regulation is facially invalid.’ In-
stead, [the plaintiffs’] burden is to show that the Rule itself
is inconsistent with the statute on its face.” Brief for Peti-
tioners 27–28 (quoting INS v. National Center for Immi-
grants’ Rights, Inc., 502 U. S. 183, 188 (1991) (addressing a
facial challenge under the Immigration and Nationality
Act)). Nowhere in either of their briefs before us do the
plaintiffs dispute that assessment. Accordingly, we take it
as given for our purposes here. 2
   In doing so, we turn first to the question whether
§478.11’s provisions addressing weapon parts kits are in-
consistent on their face with the GCA. The answer turns
——————
   2 The dissents raise a number of questions about what test courts

should apply when a party contends that an agency has acted in excess
of its statutory authority in a pre-enforcement challenge under the APA.
Post, at 7 (opinion of THOMAS, J.); post, at 3 (opinion of ALITO, J.). But
the theories the dissents proceed to advance were not pressed or passed
upon below, nor did the parties make them before this Court. Cf. post,
at 5 (opinion of ALITO, J.) (suggesting that the Court ask for supplemental
briefing). In these circumstances, we believe the better course is to leave
further analysis of the proper test for another day and address the par-
ties’ dispute as they have chosen to frame it. Nor, on remand, may the
parties seek to inject arguments about the proper test that they did not
pursue here. See Ohio v. Environmental Protection Agency, 603 U. S.
279, 299 (2024) (forfeiture); Sibbald v. United States, 12 Pet. 488, 492
(1838) (law of the case); contra, post, at 9 (THOMAS, J., dissenting).
8                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

on subsection (A) of §921(a)(3). There, remember, the GCA
authorizes ATF to regulate “any weapon (including a
starter gun) which will or is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.”
Inhering in this language are two requirements. First, a
“weapon” must be present. Second, that “weapon” must
meet one of three criteria: It must be able to expel a projec-
tile by the action of an explosive, designed to do so, or sus-
ceptible of ready conversion to operate that way. As the
Fifth Circuit saw it, §478.11’s provisions addressing
weapon parts kits are facially invalid because no weapon
parts kit can ever satisfy the statute’s two requirements.
We disagree because, to our eyes, at least some kits will sat-
isfy both.
                              A
  To appreciate why, it helps to work with an example.
Take a weapon parts kit featured prominently in the record
before us: Polymer80’s “Buy Build Shoot” kit. It comes with
“all of the necessary components to build” a Glock-variant
semiautomatic pistol. App. to Pet. for Cert. 219a. And it is
so easy to assemble that, in an ATF test, an individual who
had never before encountered the kit was able to produce a
gun from it in 21 minutes using only “common” tools and
instructions found in publicly available YouTube videos.
Id., at 220a. The first picture below shows the kit; the sec-
ond depicts the gun the kit yields.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)   9

                      Opinion of the Court




Id., at 232a, 238a.
10                    BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                         Opinion of the Court

  Now, assess whether the “Buy Build Shoot” kit meets
subsection (A)’s two tests, and start with the question
whether Polymer80’s offering qualifies as a “weapon.”
When Congress adopted the GCA in 1968, that term meant
what it means today: “an instrument of offensive or defen-
sive combat . . . [such] as a club, sword, gun, or grenade.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2589 (def. 1)
(1966); accord, 1 Concise Oxford English Dictionary 1476
(def. 1) (5th ed. 1964). As a result, ATF’s authority under
subsection (A) extends only to instruments of combat, not
to other things like industrial tools or toy guns that may
“expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.” It is a fea-
ture of the statute the agency itself has long acknowledged.
See 87 Fed. Reg. 24684.
  Plainly, the finished “Buy Build Shoot” kit is an instru-
ment of combat. No one would confuse the semiautomatic
pistol pictured above with a tool or a toy. Of course, as sold,
the kit requires some assembly. But a number of consider-
ations persuade us that, even as sold, the “Buy Build Shoot”
kit qualifies as a “weapon.”
  Consider, first, a feature of ordinary language. The term
“weapon” is an artifact noun—a word for a thing created by
humans. Artifact nouns are typically “characterized by an
intended function,” rather than by “some ineffable ‘natural
essence.’ ” S. Grimm & B. Levin, Artifact Nouns: Reference
and Countability, in 2 Proceedings of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the North East Linguistic Society (NELS 47) 55
(2017). 3 Reflecting as much, everyday speakers sometimes
use artifact nouns to refer to unfinished objects—at least
when their intended function is clear. An author might in-
vite your opinion on her latest novel, even if she sends you
——————
   3 Accord, Brief for Professors and Scholars of Linguistics and Law as

Amici Curiae 6–9; J. Pustejovsky, The Generative Lexicon 97 (1995);
J. Coleman & O. Simchen, “Law,” 9 Legal Theory 1, 20 (2003); T. Par-
sons, The Progressive in English, 12 Linguistics in Philosophy 213, 225–
226 (1989).
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                      Opinion of the Court

an unfinished manuscript. A friend might speak of the ta-
ble he just bought at IKEA, even though hours of assembly
remain ahead of him. In both cases, the artifact noun fits
because the intended function of the unfinished object is ob-
vious to speaker and listener alike.
   The term weapon can work this way, too. Imagine a rifle
disassembled for storage, transport, or cleaning. It may
take time to render the rifle useful for combat, but its in-
tended function is clear. And, as a matter of every day
speech, that rifle is a weapon, whether disassembled or
combat ready. In the same way and for the same reason,
an ordinary speaker might well describe the “Buy Build
Shoot” kit as a “weapon.” Yes, perhaps a half hour of work
is required before anyone can fire a shot. But even as sold,
the kit comes with all necessary components, and its in-
tended function as instrument of combat is obvious. Really,
the kit’s name says it all: “Buy Build Shoot.”
   Next, consider what the statute itself has to say about the
term “weapon.” Subsection (A) tells us that the term “in-
clud[es] a starter gun.” §921(a)(3)(A). A starter gun, of
course, normally fires blanks, not bullets, and is usually
found at sporting events, not in combat. See United States
v. Hall, 396 F. 2d 841, 842, n. 2 (CA4 1968). To be sure, a
starter gun can be converted to live fire using a power tool
commonly available at hardware stores. See United States
v. Mullins, 446 F. 3d 750, 755 (CA8 2006). For someone
with no “specialized knowledge,” the process can take “less
than an hour.” Ibid. But, notably, the statute teaches that
a starter gun is a “weapon” before anyone invests that work.
All of which indicates that Congress used that term, as an
ordinary speaker might, to embrace some unfinished in-
struments of combat like Polymer80’s product.
   Finally, notice another feature of the statute. If Congress
had wanted to regulate only operable firearms, it could
have simply addressed “weapons” that can “expel a projec-
tile by the action of an explosive.” But Congress didn’t stop
12                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

there. Instead, Congress explained that a “weapon” also
qualifies for regulation if it is either “designed” to accom-
plish that function or “capable of being “readily . . . con-
verted” to do so. §921(a)(3)(A). Those latter provisions nec-
essarily contemplate that some things short of fully
operable firearms will qualify as “weapons.” And if that is
true, it is difficult to see how the easy-to-assemble “Buy
Build Shoot” kit might not be among them.
   Of course, to implicate the Act, not only must a “weapon”
be present. That weapon must meet one of the just-re-
counted conditions. At a minimum, that means a weapon
must be capable of being “readily . . . converted to expel a
projectile by the action of an explosive.” Ibid. As we see it,
the “Buy Build Shoot” kit satisfies that test, too.
   Begin with what we can glean about the “ready-conver-
sion” standard from the statute. We know that Congress’s
direction that a starter gun is a “weapon” would be point-
less unless a starter gun satisfies all subsection (A)’s terms.
For the statute to make sense, then, a starter gun must be
able to fire bullets, designed to do so, or capable of ready
conversion to operate that way. Generally, however, a
starter gun meets neither of the first two conditions, for its
barrel is deliberately blocked. See United States v. 16,179
Molso Italian .22 Caliber Winlee Derringer Convertible
Starter Guns, 443 F. 2d 463, 465 (CA2 1971). That leaves
only one serious possibility: It must be that a starter gun
“can readily be converted to expel projectiles by the action
of an explosive.”
   That turns out to tell us all we need to know about the
statute’s “ready conversion” test. As we have seen, a person
without any specialized knowledge can convert a starter
gun into a working firearm using everyday tools in less than
an hour. Mullins, 446 F. 3d, at 755. And measured against
that yardstick, the “Buy Build Shoot” kit can be “readily
converted” into a firearm too, for it requires no more time,
effort, expertise, or specialized tools to complete. App. to
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            13

                      Opinion of the Court

Pet. for Cert. 220a. If the one meets the statutory test, so
must the other.
   Admittedly, our reasoning here has its limits. Just be-
cause some kits, like Polymer80’s, qualify as “weapons” that
“can readily be converted” into working firearms does not
mean all do. Think of the problem of the heap: Start with
a heap of sand and begin removing grains; at some point, a
heap no longer exists. That problem attends many artifact
nouns. Even when used to capture unfinished products, ar-
tifact nouns generally reach only so far. It would be extrav-
agant to speak of a novel when the author has dashed off
only a few lines. Few would call a pile of unfinished logs a
table. Subsection (A) may present a similar problem.
Weapon parts kits vary widely. See Part I–A, supra. Not
all come as complete as the “Buy Build Shoot” kit. Some,
too, may require more time, expertise, or specialized tools
to finish. And at some point a kit may be so incomplete or
cumbersome to assemble that it can no longer fairly be de-
scribed as a “weapon” capable of “read[y] . . . conver[sion]”
into a working firearm. §921(a)(3)(A).
   While we recognize the problem, this case does not re-
quire us to untangle exactly how far subsection (A) reaches.
The plaintiffs argue only that §478.11’s provision address-
ing weapon parts kits is facially inconsistent with the stat-
ute. The Fifth Circuit adopted the same view after coming
to the unqualified conclusion that weapon parts kits can
never satisfy the statute’s two tests. To resolve this case, it
is enough to say those assessments are mistaken. Because
at least some weapon parts kits satisfy both of subsection
(A)’s tests, §478.11 is not facially invalid. Future cases may
present other and more difficult questions about ATF’s reg-
ulations. But we take cases as they come and today resolve
only the question posed to us.
                              B
  The plaintiffs dispute little of what we have said. They
14                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                       Opinion of the Court

admit that artifact nouns sometimes capture unfinished ar-
ticles. Tr. of Oral Arg. 76–77. They recognize that starter
guns qualify as “weapons” even though they require work
before they operate as functional firearms. Brief for Re-
spondent VanDerStok 34. The plaintiffs concede, too, that
disassembled rifles and guns are “weapons” that can be
“readily . . . converted” to live fire because they have “all the
parts necessary” for an ordinary person “to put together a
functioning firearm” in short order. Id., at 37. Really, the
plaintiffs fail only to take the next step and acknowledge
that the same might be said of some weapon parts kits.
   Given all that, what do the plaintiffs have to say in sup-
port of the Fifth Circuit’s conclusion that subsection (A)
reaches no weapon parts kits? Perhaps their best argument
centers on the fact that other statutes address collections of
parts while this one does not. As the plaintiffs observe,
Congress has elsewhere defined a “destructive device” to
embrace “any combination of parts . . . from which a de-
structive device may be readily assembled.” §921(4)(C).
Similarly, Congress has specified that the terms “firearm
silencer” and “firearm muffler” encompass “any part” or
“combination of parts” used to “assembl[e] or fabricat[e]”
those items. §921(a)(25); see also Federal Firearms Act of
1938, 52 Stat. 1250 (defining “firearm” to include “any part
or parts of such weapon”). Subsection (A), meanwhile, em-
ploys none of those terms. And because Congress has spo-
ken elsewhere to collections of firearm parts, the plaintiffs
insist, we should infer this statute does not address parts
or kits containing any combinations of them.
   The plaintiffs’ conclusion, however, does not follow from
their premise. We do not doubt that subsection (A) sweeps
more narrowly than some other statutes. No one thinks it
reaches every piece or part that can be used to produce a
firearm. Recognizing as much, ATF itself acknowledges
that subsection (A) does not allow it to regulate “standalone
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           15

                      Opinion of the Court

triggers, barrels, stocks, or magazines.” Brief for Petition-
ers 24. Nor, the agency admits, does the statute authorize
it to regulate “weapon parts kits writ large,” without regard
to how complete they come or how difficult they are to as-
semble. Ibid. But the fact that subsection (A) doesn’t go as
far as some other statutes does not tell us how far it does
go. Let alone prove that subsection (A) fails, as a categori-
cal matter, to reach any weapon parts kits.
   Faced with that problem, the plaintiffs, joined now by the
dissent, try another tack. They object that weapon parts
kits cannot be “weapons” under subsection (A) because they
lack functional frames or receivers. See Brief for Respond-
ent VanDerStok 35; post, at 20–21 (opinion of THOMAS, J.)
(advancing a similar argument). That conclusion rests on
two premises: (1) that a “weapon” must have a fully “func-
tional” frame or receiver, and (2) that no “weapon parts kit”
includes such a part. Post, at 20–21 (opinion of THOMAS,
J.). But neither premise is sound. For one, the statute no-
where says that a “weapon” must have a fully functional
frame or receiver—nor is it obvious how we might derive
such a rule from its terms. In fact, as we have seen, sub-
section (A) reaches any “weapon” that may “readily be con-
verted” to live fire. §921(a)(3)(A). And a gun that is fully
operable, save for a frame missing a single and easily-added
screw, would surely fit that description. See Part II–A, su-
pra. For another, even if the statute did require a “weapon”
to have a fully functional frame or receiver, some weapon
parts kits may fit that description. Imagine a kit identical
to Polymer80’s in all respects, except that it has a complete
frame. Even the plaintiffs would have to admit that such a
kit would count as a “weapon” under subsection (A).
   Failing all else, the dissent suggests that other criminal
statutes addressing “firearm[s]” prove that weapon parts
kits cannot fall within the statutory definition of that term.
Post, at 22. So, for example, the dissent observes that Con-
gress has penalized the use of “firearm[s]” during and in
16                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

relation to a “crime of violence,” §924(c), required “fire-
arm[s]” to be “unloaded” during transportation, §926A, and
permitted law-enforcement officers to carry “concealed fire-
arm[s],” §926B. And, the dissent continues, it is “hard to
imagine” how any of those provisions might apply to
weapon parts kits. Post, at 22. As a result, the dissent in-
sists, we should prefer a reading that limits the term “fire-
arm” to completely operable guns. Ibid.
  This argument suffers at least two problems as well.
First, what the dissent finds hard to imagine turns out to
be anything but, for various criminal laws addressing fire-
arms can apply to weapon parts kits. Just consider some of
the laws we have already encountered that require those
who import, manufacturer, or deal in “firearms” to obtain
federal licenses, keep records of their sales, and conduct
background checks. §§922(t), 923(a), (g)(1)(A). Plainly,
those criminal laws can be applied sensibly to weapon parts
kits. Or, to take one of the dissent’s own examples, a
weapon parts kit might be “possesse[d]” “in furtherance of ”
a “crime of violence” in violation of §924(c)(1) when an indi-
vidual accused of attempted robbery purchases the kit for
assembly and use in an upcoming heist. See Stokeling v.
United States, 586 U. S. 73 (2019) (holding that a state rob-
bery statute qualifies as a crime of violence).
  Second, the dissent’s complaint is hardly resolved by
adopting its view of the statute. The dissent must
acknowledge, for example, that standalone “frame[s] or re-
ceiver[s]” and “silencer[s]” qualify as “firearms,” for the
statute tells us so expressly. §921(a)(3). Yet, only rarely
would someone use a standalone “frame or receiver” during
a “crime of violence,” §924(c), and it may be impossible to
“unloa[d]” a “silencer” during “transportation,” §926A. So
whether one adopts our interpretation or the dissent’s, not
every “firearm” will be capable of implicating every crimi-
nal law discussing firearms. It’s a fact that, if it proves an-
ything, proves only that Congress’s definition of “firearm”
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    17

                          Opinion of the Court

is a capacious one indeed. 4
                             III
   That leaves the question whether ATF’s new regulation
addressing unfinished frames and receivers, §478.12(c), is
facially inconsistent with the GCA. The answer here turns
on subsection (B) of §921(a)(3). That provision of the stat-
ute permits the agency to regulate the “frame or receiver of
any such weapon.” As the Fifth Circuit saw it, this lan-
guage reaches only finished frames or receivers. So those
who make, import, or sell partially complete frames or re-
ceivers may do so free from the GCA’s mandates, no matter
how quickly and easily their products can be finished, and
ATF is powerless to hold otherwise. Once again, the plain-
tiffs ask us to endorse that categorical conclusion. And,
once again, we find we cannot. The GCA reaches, and per-
mits ATF to regulate, at least some “partially complete”
frames or receivers. §478.12(c).


——————
   4 Separately, the dissent seems to dismiss the possibility that Congress

might use an artifact noun in a way that encompasses incomplete objects.
Post, at 15–16 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). But the dissent does not dispute
that our task here, as ever, is to interpret the words Congress enacted
“consistent with their ordinary meaning.” Wisconsin Central Ltd. v.
United States, 585 U. S. 274, 278 (2018). Nor does the dissent dispute
that ordinary speakers sometimes uses artifact nouns to reach incom-
plete objects. In fact, the dissent ultimately concedes that even Congress
“might sometimes” do the same. Post, at 16, n. 7 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).
At bottom, then, the dissent’s only point appears to be that “traditional
methods of statutory interpretation” should guide us in assessing
whether Congress meant for a particular artifact noun to reach incom-
plete objects. Ibid. On that, we agree. And here, as we have seen, one
of the most traditional tools for discerning statutory meaning—contex-
tual clues found in the pertinent statute itself—suggest that Congress
used the term “weapon” to reach at least some unfinished instruments of
combat. In saying as much, we do not suggest that Congress always uses
artifact nouns to reach incomplete objects—only that we are persuaded
it did so here.
18                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                     Opinion of the Court

                              A
  Working with another example drawn from the record
helps illustrate why this is so. The first photograph below
depicts the complete frame of a Glock-variant firearm, the
second a partially complete frame that Polymer80 sells.




App. 259, 263.
  The main differences between the completed frame and
Polymer80’s product are the plastic tabs circled in red.
Brief for Petitioners 34–35. The record suggests that those
tabs “are easily removable by a person with novice skill, us-
ing common tools . . . , within minutes.” App. 262. Once the
tabs are gone and a “few holes are drilled for the pins that
hold [other] parts in place—again, a task that anyone can
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           19

                      Opinion of the Court

complete in minutes—the Polymer80 product is a fully
functional frame.” Brief for Petitioners 35.
   A number of reasons persuade us that this qualifies as a
“frame” for purposes of subsection (B). First, like the word
“weapon” in subsection (A), the terms “frame” and “re-
ceiver” in subsection (B) are artifact nouns. And, as artifact
nouns, they may sometimes describe not-yet-complete ob-
jects. Recall the author who refers to her manuscript as a
novel, or your friend who calls his IKEA kit a table. In much
the same way, an ordinary speaker might well call Poly-
mer80’s product a firearm “frame,” even though a little
work is required to complete it. Just look again at the sec-
ond photo. What else would you call it?
   Next, consider how the GCA uses the words “frame” and
“receiver” elsewhere. Section 923(i) spells out the Act’s se-
rialization mandate. It requires those who make or sell
“firearms” to identify their products “by means of a serial
number engraved or cast on the receiver or frame.” Though
this directive may seem simple enough, it is complicated by
the fact that the statutory definition of “firearm” includes
some incomplete “weapon[s],” “muffler[s],” “silencer[s],”
and “destructive device[s].” §921(a)(3). Sometimes, those
items lack a finished or prototypical firearm frame or re-
ceiver. Yet, all the same, §923(i) treats them as “firearms”
that must have a serial number engraved or cast on their
“frame[s]” or “receiver[s].” And if the words “frame” and
“receiver” encompass some unfinished and unconventional
frames or receivers in §923(i), it is hard to see how those
same words might bear a more restrictive meaning when
they appear just a few sections away in §921(a)(3)(B). See
Azar v. Allina Health Services, 587 U. S. 566, 574 (2019)
(recounting the usual rule that a word carries the same
meaning throughout a single statute); post, at 18 (THOMAS,
J., dissenting) (admitting that a contrary interpretation re-
quires giving the terms “frame” and “receiver” different
meanings in different places).
20                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

  Here, too, examples help. Imagine a handgun that is oth-
erwise ready to shoot, but contains Polymer80’s incomplete
frame. An ordinary person, using ordinary tools, can finish
the frame in minutes. App. 262. For reasons explored in
Part II, supra, that gun is a weapon capable of ready con-
version into a working firearm under subsection (A). So
§923(i) requires the gun’s “frame”—the very item that isn’t
fully finished—to bear a serial number. Along similar lines,
consider silencers. They lack traditional frames, but §923(i)
requires manufacturers and importers to serialize them. To
accommodate that instruction, ATF has long deemed the
“outer tube . . . that provides housing or a structure for the
primary internal component” to be a silencer’s “frame or re-
ceiver.” 27 CFR §478.12(b); accord, §478.92(a)(4)(ii) (sup-
plying directions for “destructive devices”). In all these
ways and more, §923(i) uses the phrase “frame or receiver”
to reach some unfinished and unconventional frames and
receivers, making it only sensible to think the same phrase
does the same work a few doors away in §921(a)(3)(B).
   The novelty of the plaintiffs’ complete-items-only read-
ing of subsection (B) supplies another strike against it.
Without question, ATF’s new rule seeks to regulate a
greater variety of unfinished frames and receivers than the
agency has in the past. But it is equally true that, for dec-
ades, the agency has consistently interpreted subsection (B)
to reach some unfinished frames and receivers, including
ones no more finished than Polymer80’s product. See, e.g.,
Are “80%” or “Unfinished” Receivers Illegal?, ATF (Apr. 6,
2020), https://www.atf.gov/firearms/qa/are-“80”-or-“unfin-
ished”-receivers-illegal; App. 117–118 (2013 guidance); id.,
at 5, 8, 10 (1990–1994 classification letters); id., at 22
(deeming a frame with additional “material left on top” to
be a “firearm”). And while “courts must exercise independ-
ent judgment in determining the meaning of statutory pro-
visions,” the contemporary and consistent views of a coordi-
nate branch of government can provide evidence of the law’s
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    21

                          Opinion of the Court

meaning. Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S.
369, 394 (2024). 5
  Last but not least, the plaintiffs represent that they have
no “quarrel” with ATF’s “prior practice.” Tr. of Oral Arg.
59. It is a concession that all but gives the game away. Of
course, the plaintiffs think the agency’s new rule reaches
further than the statute can bear by seeking to regulate
some products too far removed from finished frames or re-
ceivers. But, for our purposes, what matters is that even
the plaintiffs do not really insist that subsection (B) reaches
only finished frames and receivers.
  Here, again, our reasoning has its limits. In saying that
a product like Polymer80’s qualifies as a “frame,” we do not
suggest that the GCA reaches, and ATF may regulate, any
combination of parts susceptible of conversion into a frame
or receiver with sufficient time, tools, and expertise. Like
the term “weapon,” the artifact nouns “frame” and “re-
ceiver” have their bounds. Some products may be so far
from a finished frame or receiver that they cannot fairly be
described using those terms. But this case requires us to
explore none of that. The plaintiffs do not challenge ATF’s
new rule as applied to particular products. They argue only
that §478.12 is facially inconsistent with the GCA. And,
here again, we have no trouble rejecting that unqualified
view.
                            B
  Resisting our conclusion on this score, the plaintiffs and
dissent press three main replies.

——————
   5 The dissent admits that ATF’s prior practice was to “evaluat[e] the

level of completion” when deciding whether an unfinished object was a
“regulable frame or receiver.” Post, at 5 (opinion of THOMAS, J.) (quoting
App. 23). So even if the new rule looks at different evidence in making
that same determination, post, at 12–13, it reflects the agency’s con-
sistent understanding that subsection (B) reaches some incomplete
“frames or receivers.”
22                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

   First, they point to a linguistic difference between sub-
sections (A) and (B). In subsection (A), Congress chose to
regulate “weapons” that “can readily be converted” into op-
erating firearms. Meanwhile, in subsection (B) Congress
spoke only of “frames or receivers,” not parts that “can read-
ily be converted” into those things. And, as the plaintiffs
see it, that omission counsels against reading subsection (B)
to reach any unfinished frames or receivers. Brief for Re-
spondent VanDerStok 19; see also post, at 11–12 (THOMAS,
J., dissenting) (making a similar point).
   This argument fails to persuade us for a number of famil-
iar reasons. For one, it does not account for the fact that
ordinary speakers sometimes use unadorned artifact nouns
like “weapon,” “frame,” or “receiver” to reach unfinished ar-
ticles. Adopting the plaintiffs’ argument would also require
us to read the phrase “frame or receiver” in §921(a)(3)(B) to
embrace only finished products, even though §923(i)’s use
of the same phrase sweeps more broadly. To accept this
argument, we would have to disregard as well the plaintiffs’
concession that the terms “frame” and “receiver” in subsec-
tion (B) are properly understood, as they have been long un-
derstood, to reach some unfinished frames or receivers.
   Even beyond all that, reading subsection (B) in light of
subsection (A) does more to undermine than to advance the
plaintiffs’ cause. Subsection (B) speaks of the “frame or re-
ceiver of any such weapon.” §921(a)(3)(B) (emphasis
added). That italicized phrase refers us back to weapons
encompassed by subsection (A). And, as we have seen, the
term “weapon” in subsection (A) encompasses some things
that are not yet fit for effective use in combat, including
starter guns and disassembled rifles, as well as certain
weapon parts kits. Subsection (B) expressly incorporates
that definition of “weapon.” And, if anything, the fact that
Congress used one artifact noun (“weapon”) in subsection
(B) to reach some unfinished articles suggests it used two
other artifact nouns (“frame” and “receiver”) in the same
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            23

                      Opinion of the Court

way in the same provision.
  Second, the plaintiffs and the dissent contend, our inter-
pretation of subsection (B) could invite a serious unin-
tended consequence under a separate statute, the National
Firearms Act (NFA), Pub. L. 73–474, 48 Stat. 1236. That
law bans the possession of “machinegun[s],” a term Con-
gress has defined to include the “frame or receiver” of “any
such weapon.” 26 U. S. C. §5845(b). Interpreting the GCA
to reach some unfinished frames or receivers, the plaintiffs
reason, might lead the government to attempt a similar
reading of the NFA. And if the government takes that step,
the plaintiffs suggest, it might next attempt to classify the
receiver of an AR–15 rifle as a “machinegun” because “it is
possible to convert” those receivers “to function as ma-
chinegun receivers.” Brief for Respondent VanDerStok 15;
see also post, at 13–14 (THOMAS, J., dissenting). That re-
sult, the plaintiffs warn, could leave many Americans fac-
ing new and unforeseen criminal liability for possession of
a “machinegun” simply because they own a “popular” and
“commonly available” rifle. Brief for Respondent VanDer-
Stok 22 (quoting Garland v. Cargill, 602 U. S. 406, 430
(2024) (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting)); 87 Fed. Reg. 24652.
  The plaintiffs’ fears are misplaced. The government rep-
resents that AR–15 receivers do not “qualify as the receiver
of a machinegun.” Reply Brief 12. Nor, the government
emphasizes, has ATF ever “suggested otherwise.” Ibid.
Much the same can be said of our reasoning today. As we
have stressed, a statute’s text and context are critical to de-
termining whether (and to what extent) Congress used an
artifact noun to reach unfinished objects. And, without
doubt, the NFA and the GCA are different statutes passed
at different times to address different problems using dif-
ferent language. Our analysis of the GCA thus does not
begin to suggest that ATF possesses authority to regulate
AR–15 receivers as machineguns under the NFA.
  Third, the plaintiffs criticize ATF’s rule for permitting
24                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      Opinion of the Court

the agency to consider “jigs,” “tools,” and “instructions”
when deciding whether an incomplete “frame or receiver” is
close enough to the finished product to fall under subsection
(B). Brief for Respondent VanDerStok 25–26. The dissent
echoes the complaint, offering a photo from the record de-
picting various tools and jigs. See post, at 14 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.). But if this is a problem at all, it is one for
another day. As litigated, this case does not call on us to
address what weight, if any, ATF may lawfully give jigs,
tools, and instructions when deciding whether a frame or
receiver is present. This case requires us to answer only
whether subsection (B) reaches some incomplete frames or
receivers. Saying that it does is enough to resolve the dis-
pute before us.
                               *
   The plaintiffs close by asking us to invoke the rule of len-
ity or the doctrine of constitutional avoidance to resolve in
their favor any ambiguities about §921(a)(3). Brief for Re-
spondent VanDerStok 38; see also post, at 24 (THOMAS, J.,
dissenting). But neither lenity nor avoidance has any role
to play where “text, context, and structure” decide the case.
Van Buren v. United States, 593 U. S. 374, 393–394 (2021).
And even if ambiguities at the outer boundaries of subsec-
tions (A) and (B) emerge in future disputes involving the
application of those provisions to particular products, no
room for doubt exists about the answer to the question the
parties have posed to us. The GCA embraces, and thus per-
mits ATF to regulate, some weapon parts kits and unfin-
ished frames or receivers, including those we have dis-
cussed. Because the court of appeals held otherwise, its
judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                              It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

                   SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 23–852
                          _________________


   PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
  PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
      ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
        COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                        [March 26, 2025]

   JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, concurring.
   I join the Court’s opinion in full. I write separately to
address two points raised in the writings that follow. The
first is a concern that ATF’s rule might leave regulated en-
tities in doubt about when and how to comply with the Gun
Control Act. See post, at 1 (KAVANAUGH, J., concurring).
That worry is unfounded.
   For more than half a century, firearms dealers, manufac-
turers, and importers have complied with the Gun Control
Act’s requirements. They have marked their products with
serial numbers, kept records of firearm sales, and con-
ducted background checks for prospective buyers. See 18
U. S. C. §§922(t), 923(g)(1)(A), 923(i). These requirements
are not new to the industry, and covered entities know they
must maintain familiarity with the statute and accompany-
ing regulations to run their businesses. In fact, the Act re-
quires such entities to obtain federal licenses before selling,
manufacturing, or importing any firearms in the first place.
§923(a).
   What is new is that some manufacturers have sought to
circumvent the Act’s requirements by selling easy-to-
assemble firearm kits and frames, which they claim fall
outside the statute’s scope. See 87 Fed. Reg. 24652, 24655,
24686 (2022). ATF’s rule simply confirms what was already
clear: The Gun Control Act does not tolerate such evasion.
2                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                   SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

Its plain text covers firearm kits and unfinished frames or
receivers designed for ready conversion, as the Court ex-
plains. So, for entities who seek to comply with the Act in
good faith, ATF’s rule should come as no surprise. Nor
should it create any difficulty discerning how to abide by
the law.
   To the extent any manufacturer has doubts about
whether a particular product qualifies as a covered firearm,
moreover, it can eliminate uncertainty by seeking clarifica-
tion from the agency. ATF encourages manufacturers to
submit potentially covered products to the agency for clas-
sification decisions. See Brief for Petitioners 5 (citing Dept.
of Justice, Bureau of ATF, Office of Enforcement Programs
& Servs., ATF National Firearms Act Handbook 41 (ATF E-
Publication 5320.8 rev. Apr. 2009)); 27 CFR §478.92(c)
(2023). Manufacturers have long taken advantage of that
process, see, e.g., App. 8, 10–12, 21–22, 50–52, 53–54, and a
failure to do so might suggest willfulness on their part.
   The second point I address is the suggestion that the Act
permits ATF to regulate only “all-but-assembled” weapon
parts kits and frames “as close to completion as possible.”
Post, at 1 (ALITO, J., dissenting). The Court’s opinion
speaks for itself on that point and others. I encourage read-
ers to go to the source, rather than rely on dissents, to un-
derstand what the Court holds. See ante, at 7, 11–12, 18,
20–22, 24. It is the Court’s ruling, not the one set forth by
the dissents, that binds the lower courts.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                   KAVANAUGH, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 23–852
                          _________________


   PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
  PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
      ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
        COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                        [March 26, 2025]

  JUSTICE KAVANAUGH, concurring.
  I join the Court’s opinion in full. I add this concurrence
to briefly address mens rea issues with respect to ATF’s
2022 rule.
  Under ATF’s rule, an individual or business acting in
good faith might nonetheless have substantial difficulty
determining when weapon parts kits or unfinished frames
or receivers qualify as firearms—and thereby become
subject to the Gun Control Act’s licensing, recordkeeping,
serialization, and background-check requirements. Some
weapon parts kits and unfinished frames or receivers may
qualify as firearms, and others may not. See ante, at 13,
21. The line is not entirely clear. Despite the vagueness of
the line, the penalties for violations are significant and can
include fines and imprisonment. See 18 U. S. C. §924.
  But importantly, under the Gun Control Act, someone
can be penalized for violating the licensing, recordkeeping,
or serialization requirements only if he does so “willfully.”
§924(a)(1)(D). To prove “willfulness,” the Government must
demonstrate that an individual knew that his conduct was
unlawful, not merely that he knew the facts that made his
conduct unlawful. Bryan v. United States, 524 U. S. 184,
191–196 (1998). Therefore, with respect to ATF’s rule, the
“willfulness” requirement should help prevent the
Government from unfairly penalizing an individual who is
2                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                   KAVANAUGH, J., concurring

not aware that his conduct violates the law.
  As to background-check violations, by contrast, the
statute penalizes violations committed “knowingly.”
§§922(t), 924(a)(5). The “knowingly” mens rea requires
“proof of knowledge of the facts that constitute the offense.”
Id., at 193. Unlike the “willfully” mens rea, it generally does
not require knowledge that the conduct was unlawful. See
id., at 192–193.      That lesser “knowingly” mens rea
requirement could therefore create concerns about fair
notice, at least in certain cases. See Wooden v. United
States, 595 U. S. 360, 379 (2022) (KAVANAUGH, J.,
concurring).
  That said, at oral argument, the Government represented
that it would “likely” decline to “charge someone” for a
background-check violation in the “kind of situation” where
the individual was not aware that he was violating the law.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 46–47. As the Government seemed to
recognize, if the Government were to charge a background-
check violation against an individual who was unaware
that he was violating the law, that defendant might have a
due process argument based on lack of fair notice. I expect
that the Government will seek to avoid that potential fair-
notice problem by adhering to its oral-argument
representation that it would likely decline to bring charges
in those circumstances.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                    JACKSON, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 23–852
                         _________________


   PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
  PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
      ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
        COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                       [March 26, 2025]

   JUSTICE JACKSON, concurring.
   To me, the nature of the claim at issue in this case makes
its resolution quite straightforward. No one disputes that
Congress delegated rulemaking authority to the Executive
Branch through the Gun Control Act of 1968, as amended.
See 18 U. S. C. §926(a). Nor is it contested that the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, an Executive
Branch agency, relied on that delegated authority to prom-
ulgate the challenged rule. Before us, respondents claim
only that portions of the resulting rule exceed the agency’s
statutory authority. See 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(C). Our judicial
charge, then, is to evaluate the scope of the Gun Control
Act’s delegation of authority to the agency, and to deter-
mine whether the agency’s actions transgressed those
bounds. That limited exercise should be dispositive.
   Proper excess-of-authority review must focus on actual
statutory boundaries, not on whether the agency’s discre-
tionary choices overlap precisely with what we, as une-
lected judges, would have done if we were standing in the
agency’s shoes. And where, as here, the statute’s bounda-
ries do not foreclose the agency’s action, the excess-of-au-
thority claim should meet its end. I concur because I read
the Court’s opinion to be consistent with this view.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 23–852
                         _________________


   PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
  PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
      ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
        COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                       [March 26, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS, dissenting.
   The Government asked this Court just last Term to “ ‘re-
write’ ” statutory text so that it could regulate semiauto-
matic weapons as machineguns. Garland v. Cargill, 602
U. S. 406, 428 (2024). We declined to do so. The Govern-
ment now asks us to rewrite statutory text so that it can
regulate weapon-parts kits. This time, the Court obliges. I
would not. The statutory terms “frame” and “receiver” do
not cover the unfinished frames and receivers contained in
weapon-parts kits, and weapon-parts kits themselves do
not meet the statutory definition of “firearm.” That should
end the case. The majority instead blesses the Govern-
ment’s overreach based on a series of errors regarding both
the standard of review and the interpretation of the statute.
I respectfully dissent.
                              I
                              A
  In 1934, Congress enacted the National Firearms Act
(NFA), the first federal statute to regulate the firearms in-
dustry. Congress enacted this statute to “provide for the
taxation of manufacturers, importers, and dealers in cer-
tain firearms and machine guns, to tax the sale or other
disposal of such weapons, and to restrict importation and
regulate interstate transportation thereof.” Ch. 757, 48
2                   BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

Stat. 1236.
   The NFA defined “firearm” narrowly. The term covered
only certain short-barreled shotguns or rifles, ma-
chineguns, and silencers or mufflers. Ibid. Congress broad-
ened that definition four years later through the Federal
Firearms Act of 1938 (FFA), defining “firearm” to include
“any weapon . . . designed to expel a projectile or projectiles
by the action of an explosive . . . or any part or parts of such
weapon.” 52 Stat. 1250 (emphasis added). With minor
amendments not relevant here, that definition endured for
about 30 years.
   In 1968, Congress replaced the FFA with the Gun Control
Act (GCA). The GCA, which remains in effect today, is the
principal federal law regulating the commercial firearm
market. See Pub. L. 90–618, 82 Stat. 1213. It requires
manufacturers and dealers of firearms to have a federal li-
cense, and, in most cases, to conduct background checks,
maintain records, and apply serial numbers to their fire-
arms. See 18 U. S. C. §§922(t) and 923(a), (g)(1)(A), and (i).
The GCA also imposes criminal sanctions for a variety of
well-known firearms offenses. See, e.g., §922(g) (prohibit-
ing large swaths of people from shipping, transporting, pos-
sessing, or receiving a “firearm”); §924(c) (providing a sen-
tencing enhancement for persons who carry a “firearm”
during crimes of violence or drug-trafficking crimes).
   The GCA sets forth a narrower definition of “firearm”
than the FFA did. Its definition, which governs all of
“Chapter 44—Firearms,” §§921–934, states that a “firearm”
is:
    “(A) any weapon (including a starter gun) which
    will or is designed to or may readily be converted
    to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive;
    (B) the frame or receiver of any such weapon;
    (C) any firearm muffler or firearm silencer; or
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                   3

                        THOMAS, J., dissenting

     (D) any destructive device. Such term does not in-
     clude an antique firearm.” §921(a)(3).
   Whereas the FFA had treated “any part or parts” of a fire-
arm as a regulable firearm, the GCA deems only a firearm’s
“frame or receiver” to be firearm parts that qualify as a fire-
arm in their own right. §921(a)(3)(B).
   Congress left the terms “frame” and “receiver” undefined.
See §921. Shortly after the GCA’s enactment, the Bureau
of Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division1 promulgated a regu-
lation defining “frame or receiver” as “[t]hat part of a fire-
arm which provides housing for the hammer, bolt or breech-
block, and firing mechanism, and which is usually threaded
at its forward portion to receive the barrel.” 33 Fed. Reg.
18558 (1968) (emphasis deleted). 2
   That regulatory definition made sense. At the time of the
GCA’s enactment, the term “frame” was generally under-
stood to mean “the basic structure and principal component
of a firearm.” C. Mueller & J. Olson, Small Arms Lexicon
and Concise Encyclopedia 87 (1968) (Olson’s). And, the
term “receiver” was generally understood to mean the “part
of a gun that houses the breech action and firing mecha-
nism.” Id., at 168. Thus, ATF’s initial definition of “frame
or receiver” accorded with the terms’ ordinary meanings.
See 33 Fed. Reg. 18558 (“[t]hat part of a firearm which pro-
vides housing for the hammer, bolt or breechblock, and fir-
ing mechanism”).
   ATF ’s definition also aligned with the GCA, because for

——————
  1 The Bureau of Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division was the predecessor

entity to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF).
For the remainder of this opinion, I refer to the relevant agency at any
time as “ATF.”
  2 The GCA authorizes the Attorney General to “prescribe only such

rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out” the statute. 18
U. S. C. §926(a). The Attorney General has delegated this authority to
ATF. See 28 CFR §0.130(a) (2023).
4                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

“any weapon” to “expel a projectile by the action of an ex-
plosive,” §921(a)(3)(A), the weapon must have both a mech-
anism that will initiate that explosion and a way to seal the
firing chamber. In other words, the weapon must have a
“frame” or “receiver.” See Olson’s 87, 168. Thus, by defin-
ing frame or receiver as the parts of a gun that provide
“housing for the hammer, bolt or breechblock, and firing
mechanism,” 33 Fed. Reg. 18558, ATF’s initial definition fit
neatly into the statutory scheme. This understanding of
“frame” and “receiver” governed for over 50 years.
   But, ATF recently changed course, in an effort to regulate
so-called ghost guns—i.e., privately made firearms built
from kits or collections of unfinished parts. To tackle what
it perceived to be the “homeland security threat” posed by
the “wide availability of ghost guns,” the agency promul-
gated a rule redefining “firearm,” “frame,” and “receiver.”
Definition of “Frame or Receiver” and Identification of Fire-
arms, 87 Fed. Reg. 24652, 24658 (2022) (Rule) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Without any change to the stat-
ute, this Rule expanded the regulatory definition of “fire-
arm” to include “a weapon parts kit that is designed to or
may readily be completed, assembled, restored, or other-
wise converted to expel a projectile by the action of an ex-
plosive.” 27 CFR §478.11 (2023). It also broadened the def-
inition of “frame or receiver” to include “a partially
complete, disassembled, or nonfunctional frame or receiver,
including a frame or receiver parts kit, that is designed to
or may readily be completed, assembled, restored, or other-
wise converted to function as a frame or receiver.”
§478.12(c).
   One of the Rule’s critical innovations is the manner in
which it allows ATF to determine whether an object is
“clearly identifiable”—and thus regulable—as an unfin-
ished frame or receiver:
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

    “When issuing a classification, the Director may con-
    sider any associated templates, jigs, molds, equipment,
    tools, instructions, guides, or marketing materials that
    are sold, distributed, or possessed with the item or kit,
    or otherwise made available by the seller or distributor
    of the item or kit to the purchaser or recipient of the
    item or kit.” Ibid.
   “Prior to this rule, ATF did not examine templates, jigs,
or other items and materials in determining whether par-
tially complete frames or receivers were ‘firearms’ under
the GCA.” 87 Fed. Reg. 24668; see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 39–
40 (acknowledging the change). Instead, ATF looked to the
object itself to determine whether it was sufficiently com-
plete to constitute a regulable frame or receiver. See, e.g.,
App. 23 (2004 guidance letter from ATF explaining that the
agency “evaluates the level of completion of the submitted
sample . . . and makes a comparison with a sample of a com-
pleted firearm of the same type”). The new definition, how-
ever, expanded the meaning of “frame” and “receiver” to in-
corporate items entirely separate from the object itself.
According to ATF, whether an unusable, unfinished piece
of metal constitutes a regulable “frame or receiver” can turn
on a manufacturer’s “marketing materials.” 87 Fed. Reg.
24668.
   ATF offered one meager limit on its broad, new defini-
tions: Under the Rule, “raw material,” such as an “un-
formed block of metal” or “liquid polymer,” will not consti-
tute a regulable frame or receiver. 27 CFR §478.12(c).
                             B
  Before the Rule took effect, a group of individuals and
manufacturers of weapon-parts kits filed a petition for re-
view challenging the Rule’s new definitions of “frame or re-
ceiver” and “firearm.” As relevant here, the plaintiffs al-
leged that the Rule exceeded ATF’s “statutory jurisdiction,
6                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

authority, or limitations” under the Administrative Proce-
dure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(C). See Amended Peti-
tion for Judicial Review of Agency Action and Request for
Declaratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief in No. 4:22–
cv–691 (ND Tex., Oct. 5, 2022), ECF Doc. 93, p. 42 (alleging
Rule’s expansive definitions provided ATF “new, additional
authority in excess of that proposed, considered, debated, or
passed by Congress”).
   The District Court granted summary judgment to the
plaintiffs and vacated the Rule. 680 F. Supp. 3d 741 (ND
Tex. 2023). The Fifth Circuit affirmed in relevant part. 86
F. 4th 179 (2023). It held that ATF’s redefinition of “frame
or receiver” was an “impermissible extension of the statu-
tory text,” id., at 189, and that the agency’s attempt to re-
define “firearm” to include a weapon-parts kit “stretche[d]
the [statute’s] words too far,” id., at 192. The Government’s
effort “to justify its unprecedented expansion of the GCA,”
the court explained, “collapses upon a cursory reading of the
text.” Id., at 193.
   Judge Oldham wrote separately to highlight the “stagger-
ing” implications of ATF’s new position, particularly with
respect to the AR–15, “the most popular rifle in America.”
Id., at 208 (concurring opinion). Observing that the Rule
regulates frames and receivers according to what they
might become rather than what they are, and that an AR–
15’s semiautomatic receiver can “ ‘readily be converted’ ”
into a fully automatic receiver with relative ease, he con-
cluded that, on ATF’s logic, the Government may regulate
AR–15s as machineguns. Id., at 207–208. If ATF were cor-
rect, Judge Oldham cautioned, “then millions and millions
of Americans would be felons-in-waiting.” Id., at 208.
   This Court granted certiorari to decide two questions:
whether the Rule’s new definition for frames and receivers
fits within the statutory definition of “frame or receiver” un-
der the GCA, see §921(a)(3)(B); and whether the statutory
term “firearm” can cover weapon-parts kits.
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      7

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               II
   Before turning to the questions presented, a threshold is-
sue is the applicable legal standard for analyzing the plain-
tiffs’ APA challenge. Applying traditional principles of stat-
utory interpretation, the Fifth Circuit asked whether the
Rule “conflicts with the plain language of the GCA” or
“cast[s] a wider net than Congress intended.” 86 F. 4th, at
190, 194. We took this case to determine whether the Fifth
Circuit was correct to answer “yes.” I would undertake the
same inquiry as the Fifth Circuit and ask only whether the
Rule contravenes “clear statutory text” or otherwise “ex-
ceeds the [GCA’s] legislatively-imposed limits on agency au-
thority.” Id., at 182.
   The majority takes a different approach. Asserting that
the plaintiffs conceded to having brought a “ ‘facial’ ” chal-
lenge, the Court “take[s]” this characterization “as given,”
and analyzes the challenge as a facial attack. 3 Ante, at 7.
In particular, the Court assumes, arguendo, that the regu-
latory definitions are valid so long as they cover “at least
some weapon parts kits.” Ante, at 13. This approach su-
perficially appears to apply a framework similar to that of
United States v. Salerno, 481 U. S. 739 (1987). There, the
Court explained that, to prevail in a “facial challenge” to a
statute, the challenger must establish that “no set of cir-
cumstances exists under which the Act would be valid.” Id.,
at 745.
   This approach seems plainly inapt in a challenge to a reg-


——————
  3 While the Government characterized the plaintiffs’ lawsuit as a facial

challenge in passing, see ante, at 7, the parties did not seriously litigate
the relevant standard, see post, at 3 (ALITO, J., dissenting). And, at oral
argument, plaintiffs’ counsel appeared to endorse a standard similar to
the one that the Fifth Circuit applied. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 80 (arguing
that ATF would have “gone beyond their authority” by defining “frame
or receiver” to “include items that may readily be converted to frames or
receivers”).
8                       BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

ulatory definition. “To ‘define’ is . . . ‘to settle’ or ‘to estab-
lish or prescribe authoritatively.’ ” Puerto Rico v. Franklin
Cal. Tax-Free Trust, 579 U. S. 115, 126 (2016) (quoting
Black’s Law Dictionary 380 (5th ed. 1979)); see also id., at
534 (12th ed. 2024) (equating “define” with “To state or ex-
plain explicitly”; “[t]o fix or establish (boundaries or lim-
its)”; and “[t]o set forth the meaning of (a word or phrase)”).
The point of defining a term in a regulation is therefore to
show what the law permits and what it prohibits. But, a
regulatory definition that is accurate in only a single valid
application cannot possibly “explain explicitly,” “fix or es-
tablish,” or “set forth the meaning” of a statutory term. Id.,
at 534.
   Consider a hypothetical statute that defines “motorcycle”
as “a motor-powered, two-wheeled vehicle with pedals.” If
a regulatory definition copied the same language, and then
added that “the term shall include any motorized vehicle,”
the regulatory definition obviously would be wrong. Not
every motorized vehicle is a motorcycle, and the fact that
some motorized vehicles happen to be motor-powered, two-
wheeled vehicles with pedals does not suggest otherwise. It
is difficult to see how an overbroad regulatory definition be-
comes defensible simply because some set of circumstances
exists in which the regulatory definition overlaps with the
statutory definition. 4
——————
  4 Dissenting in Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter, Communities for Great

Ore., 515 U. S. 687 (1995), Justice Scalia criticized the application of a
similar standard as “unprecedented” in the context of challenges to reg-
ulatory definitions. Id., at 731. Using an example of a statute prohibit-
ing “ ‘premeditated killing of a human being,’ ” Justice Scalia explained
that a challenge to an implementing regulation that prohibits “ ‘killing a
human being’ ” “would not be rejected on the ground that, after all, it
could be applied to a killing that happened to be premeditated.” Id., at
731–732. “It could not be applied to such a killing, because it does not
require the factfinder to find premeditation, as the statute requires.” Id.,
at 732. In other words, the regulatory definition would be unlawful in
every application because it allows the factfinder to determine liability
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      9

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

   Treating challenges to regulatory definitions as “facial
challenges” has substantial implications. If a regulatory
definition survives APA challenge so long as just one item
it covers also happens to be covered by the statute it pur-
ports to interpret, it is difficult to understand how an
agency would ever promulgate an invalid definition. So
long as it imports the definition Congress laid out in the
statute, the agency can sweep in whatever additional con-
duct it wishes. No matter how far the agency expands its
regulatory definition, the statutory definition inevitably
will capture at least some of it.
   To its credit, the majority attempts to confine the effects
of its approach to the facts of this case. Because the major-
ity assumes the relevant legal standard without deciding it,
it refrains from mandating this framework. Rather, it rests
on its conclusion that the plaintiffs essentially conceded
that the facial-challenge standard applies, and it takes the
application of that standard “as given” for this case only.
Ante, at 7; see ibid., n. 2 (“[W]e believe the better course is
to leave further analysis of the proper test for another day
and address the parties’ dispute as they have chosen to
frame it”). So long as lower courts do not equate an APA
challenge with a “facial” one, they are free to disregard the
majority’s analysis and hold that the Rule exceeds ATF’s
statutory authority. 5
——————
without meeting the statute’s requirements. A regulatory definition that
incorporates terms exceeding the statutory text creates a similar prob-
lem, as it permits liability based on elements outside the statute’s scope.
  5 Although the majority avoids settling whether the framework in

United States v. Salerno, 481 U. S. 739 (1987), is appropriate for regula-
tory challenges in the APA context, the Court may one day have to decide
this important question. This Court has at least occasionally applied the
Salerno framework in regulatory challenges. See, e.g., Reno v. Flores,
507 U. S. 292, 301 (1993); INS v. National Center for Immigrants’ Rights,
Inc., 502 U. S. 183, 188 (1991). But, as JUSTICE ALITO observes, “neither
decision explained why the Salerno rule should be extended in that way.”
Post, at 4 (dissenting opinion). If a regulation is so overbroad that it has
10                      BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

                             III
  As for the questions presented, start with the question
whether the Rule’s new definition for frames and receivers
can stand. Ordinary principles of statutory interpretation
make plain that the Rule sweeps too far: The terms “frame”
and “receiver” in §921(a)(3)(B) do not cover “partially com-
plete, disassembled, or nonfunctional frame[s] or re-
ceiver[s].” 27 CFR §478.12(c). The majority reaches a dif-
ferent conclusion based on several interpretive errors. Most
notably, the majority proceeds under the faulty premise
that our standard rules of statutory interpretation do not
apply to “a word for a thing created by humans.” Ante, at
10.
                              A
   “In statutory interpretation disputes, a court’s proper
starting point lies in a careful examination of the ordinary
meaning and structure of the law itself.” Food Marketing
Institute v. Argus Leader Media, 588 U. S. 427, 436 (2019).
As relevant here, §921(a)(3) defines “firearm” to include
“(A) any weapon (including a starter gun) which will or is
designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosive,” and “(B) the frame or receiver
of any such weapon.” Because the GCA defines neither
“frame” nor “receiver,” “ ‘we give [each] term its ordinary
meaning.’ ” Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 584 U. S.
79, 85 (2018).
   The parties agree that, in 1968, the terms “frame” and

——————
only a single valid application, it would seem plainly “arbitrary” or “ca-
pricious” under the APA, 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A), making a Salerno-like in-
quiry inapposite. Perhaps the majority’s analysis would differ if it were
asking whether the Rule was arbitrary and capricious rather than
whether it was “ ‘in excess of statutory . . . authority.’ ” Ante, at 6. But,
because the majority’s approach is untenable for the reasons explained
in this opinion, I leave the broader question of Salerno’s applicability in
the APA context for another day.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

“receiver” were understood to refer to “ ‘the basic structure
and principal component of a firearm,’ ” and “the ‘part of a
gun that houses the breech action and firing mechanism.’ ”
Brief for Petitioners 32 (quoting Olson’s 87, 168); Brief for
Respondent VanDerStok et al. 7 (same). But, ATF’s Rule
conflicts with this accepted meaning in at least two ways.
First, it defines “frame or receiver” to include objects that
are not frames or receivers, but that may be “converted”
into them in the future. 27 CFR §478.12(c). Second, it per-
mits ATF to deem an object a frame or receiver based on
“marketing materials” and other materials merely associ-
ated with it. Ibid.
                                1
    The ordinary meaning of “frame or receiver” does not in-
clude objects that may be “converted” into a frame or re-
ceiver. Ibid. As the Government itself admits, the word
“ ‘convert’ ” means “ ‘[t]o change into another form, sub-
stance, state, or product; transform; transmute.’ ” Brief for
Petitioners 19–20 (quoting American Heritage Dictionary
291 (1969)). If an object can become a frame or receiver only
after it is “change[d] into another form, substance, state, or
product,” it is difficult to understand how the object can be
considered a frame or receiver even before the change oc-
curs. Ibid. As the Fifth Circuit put it, “a part cannot be
both not yet a receiver and a receiver at the same time.” 86
F. 4th, at 190 (internal quotation marks omitted).
    The structure of §921(a)(3) confirms that objects that are
not yet frames or receivers do not meet the statutory defi-
nition of “frame or receiver.” §921(a)(3)(B). Subsection (A)
of §921(a)(3) covers weapons that are not yet functional
guns but that “may readily be converted” into them. And,
the statute makes clear that subsections (C) (mufflers and
silencers) and (D) (destructive devices), also cover more
than finished, operable products. See §921(a)(25) (defining
“muffler” and “silencer” to include “any combination of
12                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

parts . . . for use in assembling” such objects); §921(a)(4)(C)
(defining “destructive device” to include any “combination
of parts” for “converting any device into any destructive de-
vice” described in the statute and “from which a destructive
device may be readily assembled”). In contrast, subsection
(B) covers only a weapon’s “frame or receiver.”
   “[W]hen Congress includes particular language in one
section of a statute but omits it in another section of the
same Act, it is generally presumed that Congress acts in-
tentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or ex-
clusion.” Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co., 534 U. S. 438, 452
(2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). This principle
holds particular force here, where Congress applied broad-
ening language to the subject matter of every subsection in
§921(a)(3) except for subsection (B). Yet, in defining “frame”
and “receiver” to include objects that “may readily be com-
pleted, assembled, restored, or otherwise converted to func-
tion as a frame or receiver,” 27 CFR §478.12(c), the Rule
transplants the “readily be converted” and “assembled” con-
cepts from subsections (A), (C), and (D) into subsection
(B)—the very provision from which Congress omitted them.
   The straightforward reading of §921(a)(3) is the correct
one: Subsection (B)’s omission of the readily converted and
readily assembled concepts means that a “frame or re-
ceiver” does not include objects that are not yet frames or
receivers. And, until promulgating the Rule, ATF agreed
with this understanding:
     “Importantly, the ‘designed to’ and ‘readily be con-
     verted’ language are only present in the first clause of
     the statutory definition. Therefore, an unfinished
     frame or receiver does not meet the statutory definition
     of ‘firearm’ simply because it is ‘designed to’ or ‘can
     readily be converted into’ a frame or receiver. Instead,
     a device is a firearm either: (1) because it is a frame or
     receiver or; (2) it is a device that is designed to or can
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           13

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

    readily be converted into a device that ‘expel[s] a pro-
    jectile by the action of an explosive.’ ” Memorandum of
    Law in Syracuse v. ATF, No. 1:20–cv–06885 (SDNY,
    Jan. 29, 2021), ECF Doc. 98, p. 14 (Brief for ATF) (cita-
    tion omitted).
   See also id., at 36–39 (explaining why “An Unmachined
Frame or Receiver Cannot Be Readily Converted Into a De-
vice that Expels a Projectile”). ATF was right the first time.
   Tellingly, ATF’s new interpretation seems to invite “stag-
gering” consequences. 86 F. 4th, at 208 (Oldham, J., con-
curring). The NFA defines “ ‘machinegun’ ” as “any weapon
which shoots . . . automatically more than one shot, without
manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger,” and
“include[s]” in that definition “the frame or receiver of any
such weapon.” 26 U. S. C. §5845(b). ATF has defined
“frame or receiver” in the NFA to “have the same meaning
as in §478.12”—the provision that defines those terms un-
der the GCA. 27 CFR §479.11. And, although an unmodi-
fied AR–15 is a semiautomatic weapon, “every single AR–
15 can be converted to a machinegun using cheap, flimsy
pieces of metal—including coat hangers.” 86 F. 4th, at 208
(Oldham, J., concurring).
   If an object already is what it may be converted into, 27
CFR §478.12(c), then semiautomatic AR–15s would seem to
be partially complete, automatic machineguns. This rea-
soning exposes the manufacturers, sellers, and owners of
AR–15s to criminal liability under the NFA. See 26 U. S. C.
§§5861, 5871. But, Congress does not “hide elephants in
mouseholes.” Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc.,
531 U. S. 457, 468 (2001). An interpretive approach that
would allow ATF to regulate the most popular semiauto-
matic rifle in America under a statute addressing automatic
machineguns should give us pause. Cf. Dubin v. United
States, 599 U. S. 110, 130 (2023) (“Time and again, this
Court has prudently avoided reading incongruous breadth
14                    BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                        THOMAS, J., dissenting

into opaque language in criminal statutes”).
                               2
  The Rule’s definitions of “frame” and “receiver” also con-
travene ordinary meaning by allowing ATF to classify ob-
jects as frames or receivers based on criteria other than the
object’s physical characteristics. Under the Rule, any
“tools, instructions, guides, or marketing materials” that
are “made available by the seller” can convert an unregu-
lated piece of metal into a regulated “frame or receiver.” 27
CFR §478.12(c). Put another way, the mere presence of
things distinct from the object at issue can somehow trans-
form the character of the object itself.




     Figure 1. See Dept. of Justice, ATF, Open Letter to All
     Federal Firearms Licensees 3, 6 (Sept. 27, 2022), https://
     www.atf.gov/firearms/docs/open-letter/all-ffls-september-2022-
     impact-final-rule-2021-05f-partially-complete-ar/download.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                  15

                        THOMAS, J., dissenting

   Figure 1, supra, illustrates the Rule in action. Both im-
ages in Figure 1 depict unfinished receivers. Both lack ma-
chining and indexing in the key areas. The only difference
is the presence of a jig and drill bits. Yet, according to the
Rule, these extraneous items make an unfinished receiver
a regulable firearm.
   The presence of items such as jigs or “marketing materi-
als”—that are not, and never could be, part of a frame or
receiver—has no bearing on whether a piece of metal or
plastic constitutes “the basic structure and principal com-
ponent of a firearm.” Olson’s 87. Because those extrinsic
items have no impact on the ordinary meanings of “frame”
or “receiver,” the regulatory definition exceeds statutory
text by using such items to expand the scope of those stat-
utory terms. Cf. Encino Motorcars, 584 U. S., at 85 (an un-
defined statutory term receives its ordinary meaning).
                              B
  The majority leaves the issue of extrinsic objects for an-
other day, deeming the issue irrelevant under its question-
able facial-challenge standard. Ante, at 23. The majority
thus defends only the Rule’s coverage of items that may be-
come frames or receivers. To do so, it substitutes novel lin-
guistic labels for traditional statutory interpretation; mis-
takes outlier definitions for exemplars; and improperly
imports attributes of one provision into another.
                               1
  The majority’s statutory analysis deviates dramatically
from the “careful examination of the ordinary meaning and
structure of the law itself ” that is typically at the core of
this Court’s interpretive approach. Food Marketing Insti-
tute, 588 U. S., at 436. Drawing heavily from an amicus
brief and an academic paper, 6 the majority asserts that “the

——————
 6 See Brief for Professors and Scholars of Linguistics and Law as Amici
16                     BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

terms ‘frame’ and ‘receiver’ in subsection (B) are artifact
nouns,” ante, at 19—that is, they are words for “thing[s] cre-
ated by humans,” ante, at 10. The majority argues that this
type of noun is flexible enough to encompass unfinished ob-
jects. It explains that, in casual conversation, one might
refer to an artifact noun such as an “unfinished manu-
script” as a “novel,” or an unassembled piece of furniture
from IKEA as a “table.” Ante, at 10–11. Thus, the majority
argues, a “frame” or “receiver” “may sometimes describe
not-yet-complete” frames or receivers. Ante, at 19.
   It is beside the point whether, in casual conversation,
some people might use “a word for a thing created by hu-
mans” to discuss unfinished versions of that “thing.” Ante,
at 10. “In statutory drafting, where precision is both im-
portant and expected, the sort of colloquial usage on which
the [majority] relies is not customary.” Allison Engine Co.
v. United States ex rel. Sanders, 553 U. S. 662, 670 (2008).
We have expressly “presumed” that Congress does not
“draft its laws” with the informality of “casual conversa-
tion.” Arcadia v. Ohio Power Co., 498 U. S. 73, 79 (1990).
   Thus, we must evaluate the Rule’s redefinition of “frame”
and “receiver” based on the GCA’s “entire statutory
scheme,” Winkelman v. Parma City School Dist., 550 U. S.
516, 523 (2007), not the “ ‘stereotypical’ conversational
background” on which the majority relies, Grimm 58. That
scheme—as reflected in the GCA’s text, context, and struc-
ture—confirms that unfinished objects in a weapon-parts
kit do not meet §921(a)(3)(B)’s terms. Supra, at 10–15.
Dressing up colloquial usage with the “artifact noun” label
cannot override this conclusion. 7
——————
Curiae; S. Grimm & B. Levin, Artifact Nouns: Reference and Countabil-
ity, in 2 Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual Meeting of the North
East Linguistic Society 55 (2017) (Grimm).
   7 The majority suggests that I “dismiss the possibility that Congress

might use an artifact noun in a way that encompasses incomplete ob-
jects,” and then defends its reliance on the artifact noun as just another
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     17

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               2
   The majority further argues that, because “§923(i) uses
the phrase ‘frame or receiver’ to reach some unfinished and
unconventional frames and receivers,” such as the “frame”
or “receiver” of a muffler or silencer, it is reasonable to in-
terpret §921(a)(3)(B) to also cover unusual frames or receiv-
ers. Ante, at 18–20. The majority’s conclusion does not fol-
low its premise.
   Section 921(a)(3)(C) defines a firearm to include “any fire-
arm muffler or silencer.” Section 923(i) requires licensed
importers and manufacturers to place a serial number on a
firearm’s “receiver or frame.” To reconcile §921(a)(3)(C)
with §923(i)’s requirement, mufflers and silencers must
have a “receiver or frame” even though they do not as a mat-
ter of ordinary meaning. Thus, by regulation, ATF deems
a muffler’s or silencer’s “outer tube or modular piece” to be
its “frame or receiver.” 27 CFR §478.12(b).
   In the context of mufflers and silencers, the terms
“frame” and “receiver” have context-specific meanings that
cannot be generalized to other provisions in Chapter 44. As
ATF explained, “[u]nder the GCA, licensed manufacturers
and importers must identify the frame or receiver of each
——————
way to discern a statute’s “ ‘ordinary meaning.’ ” Ante, at 17, n. 4. I do
not doubt that Congress might sometimes intend to describe an incom-
plete object with “a word for a thing created by humans,” ante, at 10, or
that courts may legitimately give effect to that intent. But, my point is
that when courts determine whether a word refers to an incomplete or
finished object, they apply traditional methods of statutory interpreta-
tion to ascertain what “Congress intended to cover and did cover” in the
relevant statutes, United States v. Citroen, 223 U. S. 407, 424 (1912), not
what “[a] friend” might have meant in casual conversation, ante, at 11.
In other contexts, such as trade law, courts applying those methods have
found that Congress intended to treat incomplete versions of commercial
products differently from their completed counterparts. See, e.g., Cit-
roen, 223 U. S., at 422–423 (applying different tariffs to pearls predrilled
for use as necklaces than to pearls that were already strung into a neck-
lace). We cannot invoke the concept of the “artifact noun” to displace this
traditional statutory analysis.
18                  BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

firearm, including a firearm muffler or silencer, with a se-
rial number in accordance with regulations.” 87 Fed. Reg.
24660. Calling an “outer tube or modular piece” of a muffler
or silencer a “frame or receiver” thus may be justified as an
attempt to square §923(i) with Congress’s decision to in-
clude mufflers and silencers within the definition of “fire-
arm” under §921(a)(3)(C). Cf. A. Scalia & B. Garner, Read-
ing Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 228 (2012)
(Scalia & Garner) (explaining that context may, in rare cir-
cumstances, justify overriding a term’s established mean-
ing). But, the presumption of consistent usage is “particu-
larly defeasible by context,” see id., at 171, and there is no
reason to think that the agency’s workaround for applying
§923(i) to mufflers and silencers should alter the ordinary
meanings of “frame” and “receiver” in other statutory provi-
sions that do not implicate the same problem. In this case,
the statutory scheme makes clear that §921(a)(3)(B)’s
“frame or receiver” language does not include unfinished,
inoperable objects even if one day they may become frames
or receivers. Supra, at 11–15.
                                 3
   The majority further asserts that “reading subsection (B)
in light of subsection (A)” actually “undermine[s]” the plain-
tiffs’ position. Ante, at 22. Again, subsection (A) covers any
weapon which “may readily be converted” into a functional
gun. §921(a)(3)(A). Subsection (B) specifies that a firearm
includes the “ ‘frame or receiver of any such weapon.’ ” Ante,
at 22 (emphasis added by majority). According to the ma-
jority, that reference in subsection (B) implicitly incorpo-
rates subsection (A)’s readily converted language. And, be-
cause subsection (A) covers “starter guns and disassembled
rifles” that are “not yet fit for effective use in combat,” ibid.,
the majority argues that subsection (B) should also cover
objects that are not yet usable. That conclusion does not
follow.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            19

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

   The frames and receivers referred to in subsection (B) are
components of the “weapon[s]” referred to in subsection (A).
While the majority is correct that subsection (A)’s readily
converted language covers weapons “not yet fit for effective
use in combat,” ibid., there is no reason to think that the
readily converted language in subsection (A) applies to the
component parts described in subsection (B)—and every
reason to think they do not. ATF recognized as much just
a few years ago, explaining that “the ‘designed to’ and ‘read-
ily be converted’ language are only present in the first
clause of the statutory definition. Therefore, an unfinished
frame or receiver does not meet the statutory definition of
‘firearm’ simply because it is ‘designed to’ or ‘can readily be
converted into’ a frame or receiver.” Brief for ATF 14 (cita-
tion omitted). The majority’s examples of “starter guns and
disassembled rifles,” ante, at 22, underscore the point that
an inoperable weapon does not imply an inoperable frame
or receiver: While neither type of weapon is “fit for effective
use in combat,” ibid., their frames and receivers are typi-
cally operable.
   “We do not lightly assume that Congress has omitted
from its adopted text requirements that it nonetheless in-
tends to apply, and our reluctance is even greater when
Congress has shown elsewhere in the same statute that it
knows how to make such a requirement manifest.” Jama
v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 543 U. S. 335,
341 (2005). Rather than import language from one provi-
sion (subsection (A)) into another that conspicuously omits
that language (subsection (B)), the Court should
acknowledge that, naturally read, subsection (B) is not
broadened by language omitted from it but included in the
more expansive text of subsection (A).
                           IV
   The Court also granted certiorari to decide whether a
“firearm” can “include a weapon parts kit.” 27 CFR
20                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

§478.11. Statutory text, context, and structure confirm that
this aspect of the Rule also exceeds the scope of the statute.
The majority’s novel artifact-noun methodology cannot al-
ter this conclusion.
                               A
    Section 921(a)(3)(A)’s definition of “firearm” includes
“any weapon” that “will or is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.”
Thus, while an object that “may readily be converted” into
a gun qualifies as a “firearm” if that object is already a
“weapon,” an object that is not already a weapon does not.
    The ordinary meaning of “weapon” does not include
weapon-parts kits. At the time of the GCA’s enactment, the
word “weapon” was understood to mean “an instrument of
offensive or defensive combat . . . something to fight with
. . . something (as a club, sword, gun, or grenade) used in
destroying, defeating, or physically injuring an enemy.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2589 (1966)
(Webster’s); accord, ante, at 10. A weapon-parts kit is not a
weapon until it is converted into an operable gun. It is no
more “something to fight with,” Webster’s 2589, than the
sort of “unformed block of metal” that the Rule expressly
exempts from regulation, see 27 CFR §478.12(c). The oper-
able gun pictured in the majority opinion is “an instrument”
one may use in “combat.” The unfinished, inoperable kit
pieces are not. See ante, at 9 (images). Because these pieces
do not constitute a “weapon,” they do not fit within subsec-
tion (A)’s statutory definition.
    Statutory text and context reinforce this conclusion, as
they indicate that the “weapon” contemplated in subsection
(A) must have a “frame or receiver”—precisely the parts of
a weapon that weapon-parts kits omit. Section 923, for ex-
ample, requires manufacturers to identify their firearms
“by means of a serial number engraved or cast on the re-
ceiver or frame of the weapon,” §923(i) (emphasis added),
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     21

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

clearly implying that any such “weapon” includes a “re-
ceiver or frame.” Section 921 supports this reading by de-
limiting the definition of a “firearm” to “any weapon” con-
vertible into a functional gun, and “the frame or receiver of
any such weapon,” §§921(a)(3)(A)–(B) (emphasis added).
This provision again assumes that the “weapon” in subsec-
tion (A) has a “frame or receiver.”
   That “starter guns and disassembled rifles” are prototyp-
ical illustrations of things covered under §921(a)(3)(A) that
nevertheless “are not yet fit for effective use in combat,”
ante, at 22, underscores this conclusion. Both starter guns
and disassembled rifles usually have functional frames or
receivers. In contrast, the frames and receivers included in
weapon-parts kits are unfinished, inoperable, and so cannot
constitute frames or receivers under subsection (B). See su-
pra, at 10–15. Since “any weapon” must have an operable
“frame or receiver,” §921(a)(3)(B), a weapon-parts kit can-
not be a “weapon.” Accordingly, it cannot become a regu-
lated “firearm” under §921(a)(3)(A). 8
   Further, although the FFA previously regulated “any
part or parts” of a gun, 52 Stat. 1250, Congress limited the
GCA’s coverage to only two such parts: “the frame or re-
ceiver,” §921(a)(3)(B). “Presumably, Congress singled out
these components for special treatment because of the spe-
cial role they play in constructing firearms.” Ante, at 4. We
should “presume that a legislature says in a statute what it
means and means in a statute what it says there.” Connect-
icut Nat. Bank v. Germain, 503 U. S. 249, 253–254 (1992).
——————
   8 Of course, starter guns are deliberately not designed for combat. See

ante, at 11 (explaining that a starter gun “fires blanks, not bullets,” is
used “at sporting events, not in combat,” and typically requires “using a
power tool” to convert it into an operable weapon). Congress’s parenthe-
tical inclusion of “a starter gun” as “any weapon” is therefore best under-
stood to incorporate an outlier, “counterintuitive definitio[n],” not to ex-
pand the definition of “weapon” to include other items outside its
ordinary meaning. Scalia & Garner 232; see Babbitt, 515 U. S., at 719
(Scalia, J., dissenting).
22                      BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

   The statute’s broader context also suggests that weapon-
parts kits are not regulable “firearms.” Section 921(a)(3)
defines “firearm” for all of Chapter 44. It follows that, “if
[Chapter 44] is to be interpreted as a symmetrical and co-
herent regulatory scheme,” Gustafson v. Alloyd Co., 513
U. S. 561, 569 (1995), the term should to the extent possible
receive a consistent meaning. While it is not difficult to en-
vision how weapons that can be immediately assembled
might be helpful “during and in relation to any crime of vi-
olence” under §924(c)—also part of Chapter 44—it is hard
to imagine how an unfinished weapon-parts kit requiring
conversion could be helpful. At minimum, this understand-
ing would seem to imply a crime “during” which the crimi-
nal could take some untold amount of time to convert his
kit into a functional gun before using it. That does not fit
any crime of violence with which I am familiar. Cf. Babbitt
v. Sweet Home Chapter, Committee for Great Ore., 515 U. S.
687, 722–723 (1995) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Secre-
tary’s interpretation of ‘harm’ is wrong if it does not fit with
the use of ‘take’ throughout the Act. And it does not”). 9
                              B
     Holding otherwise, the majority reasons that, as a “thing
——————
    9 Section 924(c) is not the only provision in Chapter 44 that poses prob-

lems for a definition of “firearm” that includes weapon-parts kits. Other
provisions make clear that a “firearm” is something that may be “un-
loaded.” See, e.g., §926A. But, a weapon-parts kit cannot fire a bullet
prior to machining and assembly, so whether an unexpended bullet is
present in the kit’s inoperable firing chamber or magazine is irrelevant.
Chapter 44 also makes clear that a “firearm” is an object one may “carry
. . . concealed.” §926B. Unlike a functional gun, however, a kit is a col-
lection of unfinished parts, screws, and jigs. See ante, at 9 (images). The
notions of concealed carry and open carry in the context of weapon-parts
kits are inapposite. And, while a person might use a functional gun to
“kil[l]” another during the “commission of a crime” in a federal facility,
see §§930(b), (c), the lethality of an unfinished weapon-parts kit is no
different from that of an “unformed block of metal” exempted under the
Rule, 27 CFR §478.12(c).
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     23

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

created by humans,” the term “weapon” may encompass not
only weapons that are “combat ready,” but also those that
are “disassembled,” and that the term thus captures
weapon-parts kits “[i]n the same way and for the same rea-
son.” Ante, at 10–11. The majority again conjures up the
“artifact noun” to support an interpretation that is incom-
patible with our traditional methods of statutory construc-
tion. See supra, at 19–22.
   Unlike a disassembled firearm, a weapon-parts kit re-
quires more than merely assembling the parts to become a
functional gun. Special tools and an indeterminate amount
of time are required to convert an unfinished weapon-parts
kit into a functional weapon. Thus, even assuming that the
ordinary meaning of “weapon” does not resolve whether the
term includes weapon-parts kits, at minimum the term
“weapon” cannot encompass weapon-parts kits in “the same
way” it covers disassembled firearms. Ante, at 11.
   The majority also insists that the term “weapon” should
cover “some unfinished instruments of combat” like
weapon-parts kits because §921(a)(3)(A) includes starter
guns, which, like weapon-parts kits, can be converted into
functional weapons. Ante, at 11. But, because a starter gun
does not fit within the ordinary meaning of “weapon,” Con-
gress’s decision to expand that term to cover that one, spe-
cific object does not imply that Congress intended the word
“weapon” to also cover other objects that are not already
weapons. See n. 8, supra.
   And, both a disassembled rifle and a starter gun are
“weapons” for the reason a weapon-parts kit is not: Disas-
sembled rifles and starter guns typically have functional
frames or receivers. See supra, at 21. 10
——————
   10 The majority observes that “not every ‘firearm’ will be capable of im-

plicating, every criminal law discussing firearms” because Congress
broadly defined the term “firearm” to include objects—like frames and
silencers—that fall outside that term’s ordinary meaning. Ante, at 16.
But, as previously shown in the context of starter guns, see supra, at 21,
24                     BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               V
   The text, context, and structure of §921(a)(3) leave little
doubt that weapon-parts kits are not “firearms,” and that
the unfinished contents of these kits are neither “frame[s]”
nor “receiver[s].” But, even if it were reasonable to treat
artifact nouns differently, the Government would—at
most—demonstrate statutory ambiguity. And, when a stat-
ute with criminal applications is ambiguous, the rule of len-
ity applies. See Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 12, n. 8
(2004).
   This case is similar to United States v. Thompson/Center
Arms Co., 504 U. S. 505 (1992). There, a majority of the
Court applied the rule of lenity to interpret a tax statute
with criminal applications. That case presented the ques-
tion whether a gun manufacturer “makes” short-barreled
rifles—and is thus subject to the NFA’s “making tax,” see
26 U. S. C. §5821—by selling a pistol and conversion kit
from which one could make a short-barreled rifle. See 504
U. S., at 507 (plurality opinion). After considering several
arguments—including analogies to products that “requir[e]
some home assembly,” and comparisons to terms referring
to “ ‘any combination of parts’ ”—the plurality concluded
that it was “left with an ambiguous statute.” Id., at 509–
517. And, because the provision carried the threat of crim-
inal sanction, the plurality held that it was “proper . . . to
——————
n. 8, Congress’s decision to provide a statutory term with specific “coun-
terintuitive definitions” does not license courts to reinterpret the term
however they see fit. Scalia & Garner 232. And, while the majority iden-
tifies specific firearms laws that can coherently apply to weapon-parts
kits, ante, at 16, that overlap does not diminish the tensions I have de-
scribed above, see supra, at 21–22. Our job is to ensure a “coherent and
consistent” statutory scheme “to the extent possible.” Ali v. Federal Bu-
reau of Prisons, 552 U. S. 214, 222 (2008). That Congress’s “capacious”
definition of “firearm” already generates some tension in the statute, see
ante, at 16–17, is no reason to exacerbate that tension with a definition
that makes Chapter 44 a less “symmetrical and coherent regulatory
scheme,” Gustafson v. Alloyd Co., 513 U. S. 561, 569 (1995).
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           25

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

apply the rule of lenity and resolve the ambiguity in Thomp-
son/Center’s favor.” Id., at 518.
   Justice Scalia concurred in the judgment. Whereas the
plurality found ambiguity in the conversion kits’ potential
uses, he attributed the ambiguity to a “much more funda-
mental” question: “[W]hether the making of a regulated
firearm includes the manufacture, without assembly, of
component parts where the definition of the particular fire-
arm does not so indicate.” Id., at 519. He found persuasive
the contrast between the definition of regulated objects that
expressly included “any combination of parts,” and those
that did not. See id., at 519–520 (noting that the provision
at issue “conspicuously combine[s] references to ‘combina-
tion of parts’ in the definitions of regulated silencers, ma-
chineguns, and destructive devices with the absence of any
such reference in the definition of regulated rifles”). Be-
cause neither the definition of “rifle” nor that of “short-
barreled rifle” incorporated combinations of parts, these
distinctions made clear that the NFA “d[id] not encompass
Thompson/Center’s pistol and conversion kit, or at least
d[id] not do so unambiguously.” Ibid.
   I would take Justice Scalia’s approach here. Nothing in
the GCA suggests that the terms “frame” and “receiver”
also include the materials that one could use to create them,
or that parts including neither a frame nor a receiver could
constitute a “weapon.” See 18 U. S. C. §§921(a)(3)(A)–(B).
There are, however, many reasons to conclude the opposite.
See supra, at 10–23; cf. Thompson/Center, 504 U. S., at
519–520 (opinion of Scalia, J.).
   Even the Government appears to have found these com-
peting interpretations persuasive just a few years ago. See
Brief for ATF 14, 36–39 (endorsing the position it now re-
jects). “Now it says the opposite. The law hasn’t changed,
only an agency’s interpretation of it.” Guedes v. ATF, 589
U. S. ___, ___ (2020) (statement of GORSUCH, J., respecting
denial of certiorari) (slip op., at 3). I would apply the rule
26                 BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

of lenity here.
                        *     *     *
   Congress could have authorized ATF to regulate any part
of a firearm or any object readily convertible into one. But,
it did not. I would adhere to the words Congress enacted.
Employing its novel “artifact noun” methodology, the ma-
jority charts a different course that invites unforeseeable
consequences and offers no limiting principle. I respectfully
dissent.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     1

                          ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                              _________________

                               No. 23–852
                              _________________


    PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
   PETITIONERS v. JENNIFER VANDERSTOK, ET AL.
       ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES
         COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
                            [March 26, 2025]

   JUSTICE ALITO, dissenting.
   The Court decides this case on a ground that was not
raised or decided below and that was not the focus of the
briefing or argument in this Court. Specifically, the Court
concludes (1) that respondents mounted a “facial” challenge
to a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
(ATF) rule implementing provisions of the Gun Control Act
of 1968, (2) that a party making such a challenge must meet
the test that applies when a statute is challenged as facially
unconstitutional (what I will call the Salerno test 1), and (3)
that respondents cannot satisfy that demanding test. 2 If I
were satisfied that the Salerno test should control here, I
would join the opinion of the Court. The Court points to a
gun kit that is all-but-assembled, ante, at 8–9, and a frame
that is as close to completion as possible, ante, at 19–20. As
applied to those extreme situations, the Court holds—and I
agree—the rule does not deviate from the statute. But I am
not certain that the Salerno test should govern.


——————
  1 See United States v. Salerno, 481 U. S. 739, 745 (1987).
  2 Under that test, “a plaintiff cannot succeed on a facial challenge un-

less he establishes that no set of circumstances exists under which the
law would be valid, or he shows that the law lacks a plainly legitimate
sweep.” Moody v. NetChoice, LLC, 603 U. S. 707, 723 (2024) (alterations
and internal quotation marks omitted).
2                      BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                          ALITO, J., dissenting

                               I
  Respondents’ petition for review in this case claimed,
among other things, that the ATF rule goes beyond what
the Gun Control Act permits and that it should therefore be
“set aside” under §706(2) of the Administrative Procedure
Act, 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(c). See Amended Petition for Review
in No. 4:22–cv–00691 (ND Tex.), ECF Doc. 93, pp. 41–42.
In the Fifth Circuit and other Courts of Appeals, that pro-
vision has long been understood to permit a court to hold
that a rule is invalid in toto. 3 Thus, in both the District
Court and the Court of Appeals, the parties appear to have
proceeded on the assumption that the question presented
was simply whether the ATF rule exceeded the agency’s au-
thority under the Gun Control Act. The Government de-
fended the rule as a correct interpretation of those statutory
provisions and made no mention of the Salerno test. 4 And
for the most part, that was the position advanced in the
Government’s briefs in this Court. As the Court points out,
however, one paragraph of the Government’s brief did make
the Salerno argument. See Brief for Petitioners 27–28. But
other than quoting language in INS v. National Center for
Immigrants’ Rights, Inc., 502 U. S. 183, 188 (1991) (NCIR),
the brief made no effort to explain why that test should ap-
ply. And perhaps because of this cursory treatment, none
of the respondents addressed the Salerno issue in their
briefs or during oral argument. Noting this silence, the


——————
   3 See K. Mizelle, To Vacate or Not To Vacate: Some (Still) Unanswered

Questions in the APA Vacatur Debate, 2023 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol’y Per
Curiam 1, 3–4, and nn. 20–26.
   4 See Brief for Appellants in VanDerStok v. Garland, No. 23–10718

(CA5), ECF Doc. 77–1, pp. 18–32; Defendants’ Combined Brief in Oppo-
sition to Original Plaintiffs’ and Intervenor-Plaintiffs’ Motions for Sum-
mary Judgment and in Support of Defendants’ Cross-Motion for Sum-
mary Judgment in Vanderstok v. Garland, No. 4:22–cv–00691 (ND Tex.),
ECF Doc. 181, pp. 40–45.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                     ALITO, J., dissenting

Court regards the applicability of the Salerno test as undis-
puted, and it then proceeds to apply that test. Ante, at 7.
  On the record here, I would not hold that respondents
agreed that the Salerno test should apply. The Court relies
on the use of the term “facial” in their complaints, but that
characterization of their challenges did not constitute
agreement with the proposition that a facial challenge to a
regulation must satisfy the Salerno test. And in fact re-
spondents never conceded that point. They did not address
the issue at all in their briefs, and at no point during the
lengthy oral argument in this case were they asked about
that question. Holding that they conceded the point is un-
warranted and extremely unfair. And in any event, we
should adjudicate a facial challenge under the right test re-
gardless of the parties’ arguments. See Moody v. NetChoice,
LLC, 603 U. S. 707, 779–780 (2024) (ALITO, J., concurring
in judgment).
                              II
  That brings me to the question whether the Salerno test
should apply. In Moody, I set out what I saw as the chief
reasons for using that test when a statute is challenged as
unconstitutional. See 603 U. S., at 777–778 (opinion con-
curring in judgment). One of the most important of these
is respect for the lawmaking authority of the legislative
body that enacted the law in question. Id., at 777. A law
passed by Congress or a State Legislature should not be
held to be entirely unenforceable just because it would be
unconstitutional to apply it in just a few situations. That
would represent unjustified judicial interference with the
authority of the body entrusted under the Federal Consti-
tution or the constitution of a State with the authority to
make law.
  This threat to legislative authority is not present when a
regulation is challenged. I recognize that two of our deci-
sions support the use of the Salerno test in cases involving
4                      BONDI v. VANDERSTOK

                          ALITO, J., dissenting

facial challenges to rules. See Reno v. Flores, 507 U. S. 292,
301 (1993); NCIR, 502 U. S., at 188. But neither decision
explained why the Salerno rule should be extended in that
way, and in neither case did the Court grapple with the
question that has recently arisen regarding the scope of a
court’s authority under §706(2) of the APA.
  Applying the Salerno rule in a case in which a rule is chal-
lenged under that provision as exceeding the agency’s stat-
utory authority may have far-reaching consequences. As a
commentator has observed, “Salerno would seem to dictate
that a plaintiff [who challenges a rule] cannot ever win un-
less he can show that there is ‘no set of circumstances’ in
which the regulation would be consistent with the statute.
And because it would take an extraordinarily obtuse agency
to write a regulation so completely wrong as that, applying
Salerno in the statutory context would seem to dictate that
plaintiffs would always lose.” S. Buck, Salerno vs. Chevron:
What To Do About Statutory Challenges, 55 Admin. L. Rev.
427, 438 (2003). Thus, this extension of Salerno would rep-
resent a huge boon for the administrative state.
  It would also all but settle the debate about whether
§706(2) of the APA authorizes a court to render a rule un-
enforceable across the board. 5 Respondents asserted a typ-
ical claim seeking to have a rule “set aside” in its entirety
under §706(2), and if that claim fails because there are at
least some situations in which the application of the rule
would be lawful, then it seems to follow that virtually all
such claims will fail as well. The understanding of the “set-
aside” power that has long been prevalent in the courts of

——————
   5 Compare J. Harrison, Vacatur of Rules Under the Administrative

Procedure Act, 40 Yale J. on Reg. 119, 120 (2023) (arguing that the APA
does not confer that power), with M. Sohoni, The Power To Vacate a Rule,
88 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1121, 1122, 1126 (2020) (taking the opposite posi-
tion); see also Mizelle, 2023 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol’y, at 2–10 (summariz-
ing the debate).
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    5

                          ALITO, J., dissenting

appeals will be overturned, and parties who may be ad-
versely affected by a rule will be reduced to filing as-applied
challenges. Perhaps that is what the law calls for, but we
should not effect such a change without thorough briefing
and argument.
  For these reasons, I must respectfully dissent. I would
either direct the parties to brief the Salerno issue or vacate
the judgment below and remand so that the issue can be
addressed first by the Court of Appeals. 6




——————
  6 JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s suggestion that I have mischaracterized what

the Court has held, ante, at 2 (concurring opinion), demands a response.
Although JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR obviously wishes that the Court had gone
further, all that the Court has actually held is that the ATF rule is not
facially invalid because at least some applications of the rule are con-
sistent with the statute. And the two examples that the Court cites are
(1) a kit that contains all the parts needed to make a semiautomatic pis-
tol and that can be assembled in 21 minutes, see ante, at 8–13, and (2) a
frame that can be made functional simply by clipping off two plastic tabs
and drilling a few holes, ante, at 17–18, 21. The Court has not held that
any other kits or presently non-functional receivers are covered.