(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

    SOTO, INDIVIDUALLY AND ON BEHALF OF ALL OTHERS
        SIMILARLY SITUATED v. UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

       No. 24–320.      Argued April 28, 2025—Decided June 12, 2025
The Barring Act, 31 U. S. C. §3702, establishes default settlement proce-
  dures for claims against the Government and subjects most claims to
  a 6-year limitations period. However, the Act includes an exception: If
  “another law” confers authority to settle a claim against the Govern-
  ment, that law displaces the Barring Act’s settlement mechanism, in-
  cluding its limitations period. §3702(a). In 2002, Congress enacted a
  statute providing “combat-related special compensation” (CRSC) to
  qualifying veterans who have suffered combat-related disabilities. 10
  U. S. C. §1413a. Under federal law, retired veterans generally must
  waive a portion of their military retirement pay to receive Veterans
  Affairs (VA) disability benefits, but the CRSC statute allows combat-
  disabled retirees to receive special compensation up to the amount of
  waived retired pay.
     Petitioner Simon Soto served in the Marine Corps from 2000 to 2006,
  including two tours in Operation Iraqi Freedom. He was medically
  retired in 2006 and later received a 100-percent disability rating for
  post-traumatic stress disorder from the VA. In 2016, Soto applied for
  CRSC payments. The Secretary of the Navy approved his application
  but limited retroactive compensation to six years, citing the Barring
  Act’s limitations period. Soto filed a class-action lawsuit arguing that
  the Barring Act’s 6-year limitations period does not apply to CRSC
  claims because the CRSC statute constitutes “another law” that pro-
  vides its own settlement mechanism. The District Court granted sum-
  mary judgment for the class, but the Federal Circuit reversed, holding
  that the CRSC statute does not explicitly grant settlement authority
  and therefore cannot displace the Barring Act.
Held: The CRSC statute confers authority to settle CRSC claims and
2                        SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                                   Syllabus

    thus displaces the Barring Act’s settlement procedures and limitations
    period. Pp. 7–15.
       (a) The term “settle” in the Government-claims context refers to de-
    termining the validity of a claim and the amount of money a claimant
    is due. See Illinois Surety Co. v. United States ex rel. Peeler, 240 U. S.
    214, 219–220. A statute confers settlement authority so long as it vests
    an entity with these powers. While the most straightforward way to
    confer settlement authority may be to use the term “settle,” Congress
    need not “use magic words.” Department of Agriculture Rural Devel-
    opment Rural Housing Service v. Kirtz, 601 U. S. 42, 48–49. To deter-
    mine whether a statute constitutes “another law” that displaces the
    Barring Act’s settlement procedures, courts must examine the text,
    context, and structure of “the entire statutory scheme” to analyze
    whether the law confers authority to determine both a claim’s validity
    and the amount due. Winkelman v. Parma City School Dist., 550 U. S.
    516, 523; see Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219–220. Pp. 7–8.
       (b) The CRSC statute meets these requirements. The law confers
    upon “[t]he Secretary concerned” the “[a]uthority” to pay each “eligi-
    ble” claimant a “monthly amount” “determined” under the statute’s
    terms. 10 U. S. C. §1413a(a). Regarding validity, the statute provides
    that the Secretary concerned shall “conside[r]” whether a CRSC appli-
    cant is an “eligible” “combat-related disabled uniformed services re-
    tiree.” §1413a(d). Because the Secretary “shall pay” CRSC payments
    to “each eligible” veteran, §1413a(a), determining a claimant’s eligibil-
    ity is tantamount to determining the validity of his claim. The statute
    also confers authority on the Secretary to determine the amount due
    by instructing the Secretary to pay a specific monthly amount.
    §§1413a(b)(1)–(3). Taken as a whole, the statute establishes a unique,
    self-contained, comprehensive compensation scheme that authorizes
    the Secretary concerned to determine both the validity of CRSC claims
    and the amount due on them, thus creating a separate settlement
    mechanism that displaces the Barring Act’s default procedures. Pp. 8–
    10.
       (c) The Federal Circuit erred by imposing undue requirements on
    Congress’s ability to confer settlement authority and by disregarding
    the CRSC statute’s plain text. The court’s demand for “specific lan-
    guage” and its alternative requirement that a statute provide a specific
    limitations period to displace the Barring Act are rejected. Congress
    need not use particular words to confer settlement authority, and, in
    this unique statutory regime, it is not unreasonable to think that Con-
    gress would have provided a settlement mechanism without a specific
    limitations period. The Government’s arguments for affirmance are
    similarly unpersuasive, including its insistence on “hallmark formula-
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    3

                               Syllabus

  tions” to confer settlement authority and its concern about destabiliz-
  ing Government programs. The CRSC statute’s separate subsections,
  in combination, create a comprehensive benefits regime that author-
  izes the Secretary concerned to determine both the validity of CRSC
  claims and the amount due on them. Pp. 10–14.
92 F. 4th 1094, reversed and remanded.

  THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.
                        Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 24–320
                                   _________________


 SIMON A. SOTO, INDIVIDUALLY AND ON BEHALF OF ALL
    OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED, PETITIONER v.
                UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
                                 [June 12, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
   Title 31 U. S. C. §3702, known as the Barring Act, estab-
lishes a default settlement regime for certain claims
brought against the Government. The Barring Act subjects
most claims to a 6-year limitations period. §3702(b)(1).
But, the Act includes an exception: If “another law” confers
authority to settle a claim against the Government, then
that law displaces the Barring Act’s settlement mecha-
nism—including its limitations period—as to that claim.
§3702(a). The question before us is whether a law providing
“[c]ombat-related special compensation” (CRSC) to qualify-
ing veterans confers authority to settle CRSC claims. 10
U. S. C. §1413a. We hold that it does, and thus that the
settlement procedures and limitations established under
the Barring Act do not apply to claims for CRSC payments.
                              I
                             A
  The Barring Act establishes default procedures for how a
variety of “claims of or against the United States Govern-
ment shall be settled.” 31 U. S. C. §3702(a).
2                  SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

   The term “settle” in this context refers to determining the
amount of money a claimant is due. See Illinois Surety Co.
v. United States ex rel. Peeler, 240 U. S. 214, 219 (1916).
This meaning of “settlement” flows from the well-
established principle that in the Government-claims con-
text, when the Government “determine[s]” that a claim is
“valid,” the claim “should be paid in full.” Office of Gen.
Counsel, GAO, Principles of Federal Appropriations Law
11–6 (1982). Thus, the inquiries relevant to settling a claim
are straightforward: First, we ask whether the claim is
valid; and second, if it is, we ask how much the Government
owes.
   The Barring Act authorizes certain entities to settle cer-
tain types of claims. See §§3702(a)(1)–(4). Relevant here,
the Act provides that the Secretary of Defense will settle
“claims involving uniformed service members’ pay, allow-
ances, travel, transportation, payments for unused accrued
leave, retired pay, and survivor benefits.” §3702(a)(1)(A).
Most claims covered under the Barring Act are subject to a
6-year limitations period. §3702(b)(1).
   But, not all claims against the Government fall within
the Barring Act’s ambit. While the Barring Act provides a
default framework for settling and processing claims
against the Government, it includes a significant exception:
If “another law” creates a separate settlement process, then
that process displaces the Act’s settlement mechanism.
§3702(a); see also §3702(b)(1)(A) (stating that the Act’s 6-
year limitations period does not apply if “another law” pro-
vides otherwise).
                           B
  In 2002, Congress enacted the CRSC statute, 10 U. S. C.
§1413a, to provide special payments to military retirees
who have suffered combat-related disabilities. See Bob
Stump National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    3

                          Opinion of the Court

2003, §636, 116 Stat. 2574–2576. Under federal law, re-
tired veterans generally must waive a portion of their mili-
tary retirement pay in order to receive disability benefits
from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 38 U. S. C.
§§5304–5305. But, under the CRSC statute, a retired vet-
eran who establishes that his disability is attributable to a
combat-related injury may receive special compensation up
to the amount of waived retired pay. CRSC payments were
initially limited to military retirees who, in addition to hav-
ing suffered a combat-related disability, had served for at
least 20 years. Congress later amended the statute to cover
all combat-disabled retirees who are eligible for retired pay,
effective January 1, 2008. National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2008, §641, 122 Stat. 156.
   The CRSC statute establishes a comprehensive frame-
work for CRSC claims, governing everything from a claim-
ant’s initial application to the ultimate disbursal of pay-
ments. And, the statute confers upon “[t]he Secretary
concerned”1 authority to effect key determinations through-
out this process. At the beginning of the CRSC claims pro-
cess, the statute expressly requires the Secretary concerned
to “conside[r]” whether the applicant is “eligible” for CRSC
payments. 10 U. S. C. §1413a(d).2 In other words, the Sec-


——————
   1 “Secretary concerned” refers to the Secretary of the Army, Navy, Air

Force, or Homeland Security, depending on the military department
from which the CRSC applicant retired. 10 U. S. C. §101(a)(9).
   2 Subsection (d) further authorizes the Secretary of Defense to “pre-

scribe procedures and criteria under which a disabled uniformed services
retiree may apply” to the Secretary concerned. §1413a(d). The Secretary
of Defense has set forth those criteria in regulations and program guid-
ance. See 7B Dept. of Defense, DoD 7000.14–R, Financial Management
Regulation, ch. 63 (June 2024) (DoD FMR); see also App. 77–107 (Jan.
2004 Guidance). Among other things, the guidance requires CRSC re-
cipients to be entitled to retired pay and to have a service-
connected disability that the VA rates as at least 10 percent disabling.
DoD FMR, at 63–6 to 63–9, 63–19; App. 83–87.
4                  SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

retary concerned must confirm that the applicant is “enti-
tled to retired pay” and “has a combat-related disability.”
§1413a(c). The statute defines a qualifying “ ‘combat-re-
lated disability’ ” as one that is either “attributable to an
injury for which the member was awarded the Purple
Heart,” or that the claimant incurred in armed conflict, dur-
ing hazardous service or conditions simulating war, or
through an instrumentality of war. §1413a(e). Disabilities
that “are not combat-related” “will not be considered in de-
termining eligibility for CRSC or the amount of CRSC pay-
able.” App. 89.
   Section 1413a separately establishes how to determine
the monthly amount of CRSC payments to which an eligible
claimant is entitled. Subsection (b)(1) states that “the
monthly amount to be paid . . . for any month is the amount
of compensation to which the retiree is entitled under title
38 for that month, determined without regard to any disa-
bility of the retiree that is not a combat-related disability.”
Subsection (b)(2) sets a cap on the amount a claimant may
receive. And, subsection (b)(3) provides specific rules to fol-
low in the case of retirees who are retired under a separate
chapter of Title 10.
   The CRSC statute does not include a statute of limita-
tions or otherwise expressly limit the number of months for
which an applicant may obtain payment.
                                C
  Corporal Simon Soto, petitioner here, served honorably
in the United States Marine Corps from 2000 to 2006. Dur-
ing the first of his two tours of duty in Operation Iraqi Free-
dom, Soto served in Mortuary Affairs. In that role, Soto
“was assigned to ‘search for, recover, and process the re-
mains’ of war casualties.” App. 15. He struggled to adjust
to civilian life following deployment and eventually re-
ceived a diagnosis for post-traumatic stress disorder
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             5

                      Opinion of the Court

(PTSD), which his physicians attributed to his combat ex-
periences. Soto was medically retired from the Marine
Corps in 2006 and received numerous medals and commen-
dations for his service.
   Soto later sought service-connected disability compensa-
tion from the VA. The VA ultimately assigned him a 100-
percent disability rating for his PTSD, representing “[t]otal
occupational and social impairment,” 38 CFR §4.130 (2024),
and awarded Soto disability compensation in June 2009.
   In June 2016, Soto submitted an application to the Navy
seeking CRSC payments based on his combat-related
PTSD. The Secretary of the Navy approved Soto for CRSC
benefits in October 2016 and authorized him to receive ret-
roactive compensation going back six years, to July 2010.
The reason that Soto was eligible for only six years’ worth
of CRSC payments, the Government explained, was that
“CRSC is subject to the [Barring Act’s] 6-year statute of lim-
itations.” App. 37.
   The following year, Soto filed a class-action lawsuit in the
United States District Court for the Southern District of
Texas. He asserted that the Barring Act’s 6-year limita-
tions period does not apply to CRSC claims and that he was
therefore entitled to retroactive CRSC payments for the
months dating back to January 1, 2008—the effective date
of the statutory amendment that expanded CRSC eligibility
to include combat-disabled medical retirees who, like him,
had served for fewer than 20 years. See supra, at 3.
   After certifying a nationwide class consisting of former
servicemembers “ ‘whose CRSC applications . . . were
granted, but whose amount of CRSC payment was limited
by [the Barring Act’s] statute of limitations,’ ” the District
Court entered summary judgment for the class. See 2021
WL 7286022, *1 (SD Tex., Dec. 16, 2021). Because the
CRSC statute “defines eligibility for CRSC, helps explain
the amount of benefits and instructs the Secretary of De-
fense to prescribe procedures and criteria for individuals to
6                      SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

apply for CRSC,” the court concluded that the statute con-
stitutes “ ‘another law’ ” that “provides its own settlement
mechanism,” and so displaces the Barring Act’s settlement
procedures. Id., at *2–*3.
  The Federal Circuit reversed. “To confer settlement au-
thority and displace the Barring Act,” the court reasoned,
“a statute must explicitly grant an agency or entity the au-
thority to settle claims.” 92 F. 4th 1094, 1098 (2024). The
court determined that Congress typically confers settle-
ment authority “by use of the term ‘settle’ ” or other “specific
language”; absent such language, a statute “cannot displace
the Barring Act, unless another statute provides a ‘specific’
provision setting out the period of recovery.” Id., at 1099.
The Federal Circuit thus concluded that the CRSC statute
“only establishes who may be eligible for CRSC payments,
not how claimants can have those claims settled,” and thus
fails to confer settlement authority. Ibid.
  Judge Reyna dissented. On his view, several of §1413a’s
provisions, including those that authorize the Secretary
concerned to determine CRSC eligibility and the proper
amount of payments, confirm that the statute establishes a
process that meets the common understanding of settle-
ment. Id., at 1102–1103.
  We granted certiorari to decide whether the CRSC stat-
ute provides a settlement mechanism that displaces the de-
fault procedures and limitations set forth in the Barring
Act. See 604 U. S. ___ (2025).3




——————
   3 The Federal Circuit held that CRSC payments are “claims” that in-

volve “ ‘retired pay,’ ” 92 F. 4th, at 1100, and thus that they fall within
the Barring Act’s scope. We take these threshold determinations as
“[g]iven” for purposes of this opinion. See 604 U. S. ___ (2025) (granting
certiorari on a modified question presented).
                   Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                7

                       Opinion of the Court

                                   II
                                   A
    To decide whether the CRSC statute provides a settle-
ment mechanism that displaces the Barring Act, we first
address how this Court has construed “settlement” of
claims against the Government and what is required for a
statute to confer settlement authority.
    As both parties recognize, this Court has made clear that
“[t]he word ‘settlement’ in connection with public transac-
tions and accounts has been used from the beginning to de-
scribe administrative determination of the amount due.” Il-
linois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219; see Brief for Petitioner 22;
Brief for United States 24. As referenced above, agency
guidance reflects this established understanding of “settle-
ment.” See supra, at 2 (citing Principles of Federal Appro-
priations Law 11–6). Simply put, the authority “to settle”
a claim against the United States is the power both to “ ‘de-
termine upon the validity of ’ ” the claim, and to “deter-
min[e] . . . the amount due” on it. Illinois Surety, 240 U. S.,
at 219–220 (emphasis deleted).
    A statute confers settlement authority so long as it vests
an entity with the power to determine both a claim’s valid-
ity and amount due. Ibid. We have explained that, in the
context of waiving sovereign immunity, Congress need not
“state its intent in any particular way,” or “use magic
words” to effectuate a waiver. Department of Agriculture
Rural Development Rural Housing Service v. Kirtz, 601
U. S. 42, 48–49 (2024) (internal quotation marks omitted).
That same principle applies here. While the most straight-
forward way to confer settlement authority may be to “use
. . . the term ‘settle,’ ” 92 F. 4th, at 1099, the presence of that
word—or any other specific language—is not necessary.
Accord, e.g., Hernandez v. Department of Air Force, 498
F. 3d 1328, 1330–1331 (CA Fed. 2007) (holding that Uni-
formed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights
Act of 1994, 38 U. S. C. §§4301–4333, conferred settlement
8                  SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

authority despite referring neither to “settlement” nor
“claims”); Brief for United States 26–28 (acknowledging
“other statutory formulations that do not use the word ‘set-
tle’ ” but that nevertheless “have been found to confer set-
tlement authority”); Tr. of Oral Arg. 38 (same).
   To decide whether a statute constitutes “another law”
that displaces the Barring Act’s settlement procedures, 31
U. S. C. §3702(a), we therefore look to the text, context, and
structure of “the entire statutory scheme” at issue, Winkel-
man v. Parma City School Dist., 550 U. S. 516, 523 (2007),
and analyze whether the law confers authority to both de-
termine a claim’s validity and determine the amount due
on the claim. See Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219–220.
                               B
   The CRSC statute meets these requirements. At the out-
set, the law confers upon “[t]he Secretary concerned” the
“[a]uthority” to pay each “eligible” claimant a “monthly
amount” that is “determined” under the terms of the stat-
ute. 10 U. S. C. §1413a(a). This grant of authority includes
the power to determine both the “ ‘validity’ ” of claims for
CRSC payments and the “amount due” on each claim. Illi-
nois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219–220 (emphasis deleted).
   Regarding validity, the CRSC statute provides that the
Secretary concerned shall “conside[r]” whether a CRSC ap-
plicant is an “eligible” “combat-related disabled uniformed
services retiree.” §1413a(d). Determining an applicant’s el-
igibility requires the Secretary concerned to assess whether
the applicant has followed the “procedures” and met the
“criteria” established by the Secretary of Defense. Ibid.; see
supra, at 3–4; App. 83–90, 92–95 (administrative guidance
addressing CRSC criteria, applications, and bases for eligi-
bility determinations). Because the Secretary concerned
“shall pay” CRSC payments to “each eligible” veteran,
§1413a(a), in this context determining a claimant’s eligibil-
ity is tantamount to determining the validity of his claim.
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                     9

                          Opinion of the Court

Thus, by charging the Secretary concerned to “conside[r]”
and evaluate each applicant’s “eligib[ility],” §1413a(d), the
CRSC statute’s plain text authorizes the Secretary to “ ‘de-
termine upon the validity of ’ ” a claim for CRSC payments,
Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 220 (emphasis deleted).
   The CRSC statute also confers to the Secretary concerned
authority to “administrative[ly] determin[e] . . . the amount
due” on an eligible veteran’s claim. Id., at 219. Subsection
(a) instructs the Secretary to pay a specific “monthly
amount . . . determined under subsection (b).” Subsection
(b), in turn, details precisely how the Secretary will “[d]eter-
min[e]” the monthly payments contemplated under subsec-
tion (a), sets a “[m]aximum amount” for these payments,
and provides “[s]pecial rules” that apply to CRSC payments
for certain retirees. §§1413a(b)(1)–(3).4
   At bottom, §1413a establishes a self-contained, compre-
hensive compensation scheme for a narrowly defined group
of exceptionally deserving claimants. Taken as a whole, see
Winkelman, 550 U. S., at 523, the statute’s unique combi-


——————
   4 To be sure, both subsections (a) and (b) refer to the monthly CRSC

payments being “determined,” and, being in the passive voice, do not ex-
pressly state who will undertake that action. But, “context can confine
a passive-voice sentence to a likely set of actors,” Bartenwerfer v. Buck-
ley, 598 U. S. 69, 76 (2023), and here we do not think that Congress’s use
of the passive voice leaves ambiguity as to who has authority to deter-
mine the amount due on CRSC claims. Again, the statute expressly au-
thorizes the Secretary concerned to determine a claim’s validity at the
outset and to ultimately disburse payment. See §§1413a(a), (d). Nothing
in the text suggests that any other person or Government entity inter-
poses between application and payment to “determin[e]” the amount due
on the claims. §1413a(b). Therefore, the most natural reading of subsec-
tion (b) is that it authorizes the same entity that validates and pays
claims to conduct the interim business of determining how much the
Government must pay. Accord, Brief for United States 37 (acknowledg-
ing that §1413a may be “best read to identify the ‘Secretary concerned’
as the person who should make the relevant determinations” regarding
payment amount).
10                  SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                       Opinion of the Court

nation of characteristics authorizes the Secretary con-
cerned to determine both the validity of CRSC claims and
the amount due on them. The statute thus creates a sepa-
rate settlement mechanism—i.e., “another law”—that dis-
places the Barring Act’s default settlement procedures, in-
cluding its limitations period. 31 U. S. C. §3702(a).
                                III
                                 A
    The Federal Circuit reached the opposite conclusion be-
low by imposing undue requirements on Congress’s ability
to confer settlement authority and by disregarding the
CRSC statute’s plain language.
    The Federal Circuit reasoned that for a statute to provide
settlement authority, Congress must use “specific lan-
guage” that authorizes a Government entity to “settle a
claim—which will typically be done by use of the term ‘set-
tle.’ ” 92 F. 4th, at 1099. Absent such language, the court
continued, a statute may authorize settlement only if it
“provides a ‘specific’ provision setting out the period of re-
covery.” Ibid.
    We reject both premises. As this Court has repeatedly
explained, Congress “need not state its intent in any partic-
ular way,” and “[w]e have never required that Congress use
magic words.” FAA v. Cooper, 566 U. S. 284, 291 (2012); see
also, e.g., Kirtz, 601 U. S., at 48. Thus, even if Congress
“typically” confers the authority to settle claims “by use of
the term ‘settle,’ ” 92 F. 4th, at 1099, that standard practice
does not bind legislators to specific words or formulations.
It is enough that a statute authorizes an entity to determine
both the validity of a claim and the amount due on it. See
Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219–220.
    Nor must a settlement mechanism always feature a
“ ‘specific’ ” limitations period to fit within the Barring Act’s
“another law” exception. 92 F. 4th, at 1099. If a statute
establishes a settlement mechanism and thus constitutes
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                      Opinion of the Court

“another law” under §3702(a), then it nullifies all of the
Barring Act’s procedures as to the alternative settlement
mechanism—limitations period included. To be sure, Con-
gress’s choice to authorize the settlement of claims may of-
ten coincide with a statute of limitations, and we would not
lightly assume that Congress wished to expose the Govern-
ment to unlimited liability. But where, as here, the statu-
tory scheme involves a small group of particularly deserv-
ing claimants, it is not extraordinary to think that Congress
wished to forgo a limitations period. A settlement mecha-
nism does not require a limitations period. Thus, so long as
a statute confers authority to determine the validity of a
claim and the amount due on it, the law displaces the Bar-
ring Act in its entirety irrespective of whether it separately
addresses timing.
   Further, the CRSC statute clearly authorizes the Secre-
tary concerned to determine CRSC claimants’ eligibility ac-
cording to specific criteria, and those criteria say nothing
about time limits. See 10 U. S. C. §§1413a(a), (c), (d). Un-
der these circumstances, the most reasonable inference is
that the process of “ ‘determin[ing] upon the validity’ ” of a
CRSC claim simply does not involve applying a defined pe-
riod of recovery. Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 220 (emphasis
deleted); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 60–61 (Government agree-
ing that Congress has created settlement processes that
displace the Barring Act but lack limitations periods).
   The Federal Circuit’s focus on the absence of specific
words and provisions led it to misinterpret the CRSC stat-
ute. On the Federal Circuit’s view, because §1413a lacks
specific language and its own limitations period, it estab-
lishes only “who may be eligible for CRSC payments, not
how claimants can have those claims settled.” 92 F. 4th, at
1099. But, that interpretation “is belied by the provisions
of the CRSC statute itself.” Id., at 1104 (Reyna, J., dissent-
ing). The CRSC statute does not merely describe “who may
12                 SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

be eligible,” id., at 1099 (majority opinion); it explicitly in-
structs potential claimants to apply to the Secretary con-
cerned, and vests the Secretary with the authority to deter-
mine those applicants’ eligibility, see §§1413a(a), (d). And,
contrary to the Federal Circuit’s assertion, the statute es-
tablishes exactly “how” the claims will be settled, id., at
1099—again, by granting the Secretary “[a]uthority” to
“conside[r]” applicants’ eligibility, and then prescribing how
the Secretary will “determin[e]” the amount due.
§§1413a(a), (b), (d); see supra, at 3–4.
                                B
   The Government’s arguments for affirmance are no more
persuasive. To start, the Government agrees that a statute
may authorize settlement without necessarily using the
word “settle,” Brief for United States 26, 41–42, yet, echoing
the Federal Circuit, insists that a statute still must feature
“hallmark formulations” to confer settlement authority, Tr.
of Oral Arg. 42. Such “hallmark formulations,” the Govern-
ment tells us, include language that “speak[s] of claims be-
ing allowed or disallowed,” “refer[s] to a finding being final
and conclusive,” or designates “authority to sue or be sued.”
Id., at 38, 65; see also Brief for United States 26–28. But,
it is difficult to see how the Government’s “hallmark formu-
lations” inquiry does not devolve into the same sort of
“ ‘magic words’ ” test that we have so often denounced.
Kirtz, 601 U. S., at 48–49. As with the Federal Circuit’s de-
mand for specific language and provisions, we reject the
Government’s “formulations”-focused attempt to limit the
ways that Congress may convey settlement authority.
   The Government similarly reprises the Federal Circuit’s
assertion that the CRSC statute does not authorize settle-
ment because it lacks any “timing requirement,” and fur-
ther insists that our reading “supplant[s]” the Barring Act’s
limitations period “through [Congress’s] silence.” Brief for
United States 17, 30–32. For the reasons we have already
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           13

                     Opinion of the Court

explained, we disagree with the proposition that a settle-
ment mechanism must include a limitations period to dis-
place the Barring Act. See supra, at 10. And, the Govern-
ment’s assertion that our interpretation permits the CRSC
statute sub silentio to “supplant” the Barring Act misunder-
stands the CRSC statute. In enacting §1413a, Congress did
not displace the Barring Act’s limitations period through
“silence”; Congress displaced the Barring Act’s procedures
and limitations by authorizing the Secretary concerned to
determine the validity and amount due—and thus to set-
tle—CRSC claims. See §§1413a(a), (b), (d); supra, at 8–10.
    The Government also resists the conclusion that §1413a
confers authority to “determin[e] the amount ‘due’ ” on a
claim for CRSC payments. Brief for United States 24. Ac-
cording to the Government, such a determination “involves
more than assessing whether the claim has merit or calcu-
lating what the claimant might be owed”; it “may also entail
. . . auditing the relevant account, making adjustments for
any applicable debts or offsets, and effecting a final dispo-
sition.” Ibid. Because the CRSC statute does not explicitly
assign this level of auditing and adjustment, the Govern-
ment suggests that it does not permit the Secretary con-
cerned to determine the amount due, and thus cannot es-
tablish a mechanism for settling CRSC claims.
    This argument proves too much. The Barring Act indis-
putably confers settlement authority, yet it says nothing
about audits or offsets. Instead, it simply authorizes the
settlement of “claims.” 31 U. S. C. §3702(a). The CRSC
statute confers comparable settlement authority, see supra,
at 8–10, and is likewise silent as to the extra accounting
procedures that the Government contemplates. We decline
the Government’s invitation to read additional require-
ments into the “administrative determination of the
amount due.” Illinois Surety, 240 U. S., at 219.
    Finally, the Government warns that if the CRSC statute
“create[s] an independent settlement mechanism,” then
14                    SOTO v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

every statute containing even one of §1413a’s relevant “fea-
tures” might also displace the Barring Act, and in turn “de-
stabilize” various Government programs. See Brief for
United States 36–41. The conclusion does not follow the
premise. In holding that the CRSC statute confers author-
ity to settle claims for CRSC payments, we do not suggest
that each singular component or subsection of the statute
is independently sufficient to establish settlement author-
ity. To the contrary, we hold only that §1413a’s separate
subsections—in combination—create a comprehensive
CRSC benefits regime spanning from application to pay-
ment, and that, within this framework, Congress has au-
thorized the Secretary concerned to determine both the va-
lidity of applicants’ CRSC claims and the amount due on
them. See supra, at 8–10.5
   In all events, while we acknowledge that the Barring
Act’s limitations period plays an important role in manag-
ing the Government’s potential retroactive liability, “we
will not presume . . . that any result consistent with [the
Government’s] account of the statute’s overarching goal
must be the law.” Henson v. Santander Consumer USA
Inc., 582 U. S. 79, 89 (2017). Even if we thought sound pol-
icy called for a narrower carveout to the Barring Act’s pro-
cedures than the “another law” exception that Congress en-
acted, 31 U. S. C. §3702(a), that policy choice is a “matte[r]
for Congress, not this Court, to resolve,” Henson, 582 U. S.,
at 90.

——————
  5 As the Government itself recognized at oral argument, the number of

statutes that include all of the material features of the CRSC statute—
as opposed to just one or some of those features—appears to be relatively
small. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 47–52 (referring to “six statutes” that argua-
bly authorize a Government entity to determine both the validity of a
claim and the amount due). Notwithstanding this acknowledgment, the
Government has “reserv[ed] the right to distinguish” these statutes, id.,
at 51, and we express no view as to whether any other statute displaces
the Barring Act in a way analogous to the CRSC statute.
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           15

                     Opinion of the Court

                       *    *    *
  The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and the
case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with
this opinion.
                                            It is so ordered.