PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 604 U. S. Part 1
                             Pages 369–407




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                               March 5, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2024                             369

                                 Syllabus


 BUFKIN v. COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                  AFFAIRS

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                the federal circuit
    No. 23–713. Argued October 16, 2024—Decided March 5, 2025*
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) applies a “beneft-of-the-doubt
  rule” that tips the scales in a veteran's favor when evidence regarding
  any issue material to a service-related disability claim is in “approxi-
  mate balance.” 38 U. S. C. § 5107(b). Petitioners are veterans who ap-
  plied for service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) dis-
  ability benefts and were dissatisfed with the VA's resolution of their
  claims. Petitioner Joshua Bufkin claimed that his PTSD stemmed from
  his military service, but the VA found no clear link. Petitioner Norman
  Thornton obtained service-connected PTSD disability benefts, but the
  VA denied his most recent request to increase his disability rating.
  These adverse determinations were reviewed de novo by the Board of
  Veterans' Appeals, which rendered fnal decisions on behalf of the VA
Page Proof Pending Publication
  denying the claims. Petitioners then challenged the adverse determi-
  nations before the U. S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Veterans
  Court). Under § 7261(a), the Veterans Court reviews legal issues de
  novo and factual issues for clear error. And under § 7261(b)(1), the Vet-
  erans Court must “take due account” of the VA's application of the
  beneft-of-the-doubt rule. Applying those standards, the Veterans
  Court affrmed the VA's adverse beneft determinations, fnding that the
  Board's approximate-balance determinations were not clearly errone-
  ous. Petitioners then appealed to the Federal Circuit, challenging the
  Veterans Court's legal interpretation of § 7261(b)(1), and arguing that
  the statutory command to “take due account” of the VA's application of
  the beneft-of-the-doubt rule requires the Veterans Court to review the
  entire record de novo and decide for itself whether the evidence is in
  approximate balance. The Federal Circuit rejected this argument and
  affrmed.
Held: The VA's determination that the evidence regarding a service-
 related disability claim is in “approximate balance” is a predominantly
 factual determination reviewed only for clear error. Pp. 379–388.

  *Together with Thornton v. Collins, Secretary of Veterans Affairs (see
this Court's Rule 12.4), also on certiorari to the same court.
370                     BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                                Syllabus

    (a) Under § 7261(b)(1)'s plain text, the Veterans Court must “take due
 account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule. This
 requirement directs the Veterans Court to give appropriate attention
 to the VA's work. The Veterans Court must review the VA's application
 of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule “[i]n making the determinations under
 subsection (a).” § 7261(b)(1). Accordingly, the standards of review
 provided in subsection (a) also govern the Veterans Court's review of
 beneft-of-the-doubt issues. Section 7261(b)(1) makes explicit the Vet-
 erans Court's previously implicit duty to review the VA's application
 of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule, pursuant to the standards set forth in
 subsection (a). Pp. 379–380.
    (b) The appropriate standard of review for any given challenge de-
 pends on whether the challenge is factual or legal in nature. The par-
 ties contest whether a veteran's challenge to the VA's determination
 that the evidence on a particular material issue is not in approximate
 balance involves a legal inquiry subject to de novo review, or a factual
 fnding, or at least a predominantly factual, mixed question of law and
 fact, subject to clear-error review.
    The approximate-balance determination involves two steps. First,
 the VA reviews each item of evidence and assigns weight to it—a fact-
 fnding inquiry reviewed only for clear error. Second, the VA deter-
Page Proof Pending Publication
 mines whether the evidence is in approximate balance. See § 5107(b).
 This second step includes both legal and factual components: factual
 because it involves marshaling and weighing evidence, and legal because
 the “approximate balance” determination involves whether the evidence
 satisfes a legal standard. The VA's approximate-balance determination
 is thus at most a mixed question. And the appropriate standard of
 review for a mixed question depends “on whether answering it entails
 primarily legal or factual work.” U. S. Bank N. A. v. Village at Lake-
 ridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 396.
    Reviewing a determination whether record evidence is approximately
 balanced is “about as factual sounding” as any question gets. Id., at
 397. In Bufkin's case, the Board weighed medical opinions and family
 testimony to assess his PTSD claims. Similarly, the Board in Thorn-
 ton's case analyzed symptom severity and medical evidence to assess
 his disability rating. Both cases demonstrate that approximate-balance
 determinations require case-specifc factual review warranting clear-
 error review. Pp. 380–383.
       (c) Petitioners' counterarguments are unpersuasive. First, peti-
 tioners urge that by amending § 7261(b)(1) to include the modest phrase,
 “take due account,” Congress imposed a new standard of review for
 challenges to the VA's application of the beneft-of the-doubt rule. But
 had Congress intended to do so, it would have identifed a standard, just
 as it did in § 7261(a). Petitioners next argue that, even if § 7261(b)(1)
                       Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)                   371

                                 Syllabus

  incorporates § 7261(a)'s standards of review, the VA's approximate-
  balance determination is much like a court's probable-cause determina-
  tion, which involves a mixed-question inquiry that appellate courts re-
  view de novo. Ornelas v. United States, 517 U. S. 690, 699.
     Two features distinguish the probable-cause determination from the
  VA's determination here. First, probable cause is a constitutional
  standard, creating a strong presumption that determinations under that
  standard are subject to de novo review. By contrast, the approximate-
  balance determination is a creature of statute, not the Constitution.
  Second, probable cause poses a question that requires substantial “legal
  work,” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 398, but the VA's approximate-balance
  determination lacks a comparable legal component.
     Petitioners contend that the Federal Circuit's reading of § 7261(b)(1)
  renders the provision superfuous. While this Court's reading of
  § 7261(b)(1) might involve some redundancy, the canon against surplus-
  age does not apply here because petitioners have not identifed a com-
  peting interpretation that would avoid redundancy. See Marx v. Gen-
  eral Revenue Corp., 568 U. S. 371, 385. Pp. 383–387.
75 F. 4th 1368, affrmed.

  Thomas, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Roberts, C. J.,
Page          ProofKagan,
and Alito, Sotomayor,       Pending
                                  Kavanaugh, and Publication
                                                    Barrett, JJ., joined.
Jackson, J., fled a dissenting opinion, in which Gorsuch, J., joined, post,
p. 388.

  Melanie L. Bostwick argued the cause for petitioners.
With her on the briefs were Thomas M. Bondy, Jonas Q.
Wang, Melanie R. Hallums, Katherine M. Kopp, Kenneth
M. Carpenter, and Geoffrey C. Shaw.
  Sopan Joshi argued the cause for respondent. With him
on the brief were Solicitor General Prelogar, Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General Boynton, Deputy Solic-
itor General Stewart, Evan Wisser, Meredyth Cohen Ha-
vasy, and Christopher O. Adeloye.†
  †Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for Disabled Ameri-
can Veterans by Amy F. Odom, Robert V. Chisholm, and Zachary Stolz;
for the Federal Circuit Bar Association by Brian T. Burgess; for Military-
Veterans Advocacy, Inc., by Michael E. Joffre, Anna G. Phillips, and John
B. Wells; for the National Law School Veterans Clinic Consortium by
Katie M. Becker and Amy B. Kretkowski; and for the National Veterans
Legal Services Program et al. by D. Shayon Ghosh, Liam J. Montgomery,
Barton F. Stichman, and Diane Boyd Rauber.
372                 BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Opinion of the Court

  Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the Court.
   When evaluating a veteran's claim for service-related dis-
ability benefts, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
applies a unique standard of proof known as the “beneft-of-
the-doubt rule.” This rule requires the VA to “give the ben-
eft of the doubt to the claimant” whenever “there is an ap-
proximate balance of positive and negative evidence” on any
issue material to the claim. 38 U. S. C. § 5107(b). When re-
viewing the VA's benefts decisions, the United States Court
of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Veterans Court) must “take
due account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-
doubt rule. § 7261(b)(1). The question before us is what
the Veterans Court must do to comply with that statutory
command. We hold that the Veterans Court must review
the VA's application of the rule the same way it would any
other determination—by reviewing legal issues de novo and
factual issues for clear error. See § 7261(a). And, we hold
Page Proof Pending Publication
that the VA's determination that the evidence is in approxi-
mate balance is a predominantly factual determination
reviewed only for clear error.

                              I
                             A
   Congress provides veterans a wide range of benefts, in-
cluding compensation for disabilities caused or aggravated
by active-duty military service. §§ 1110, 1131. The VA, led
by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, administers the laws
that provide for those benefts. §§ 301, 303.
   Veterans who suffer from service-connected post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are among those entitled
to disability benefts. To establish service-connected PTSD,
the VA requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition
and linking the veteran's symptoms with an “in-service
stressor,” as well as credible evidence that the in-service
stressor occurred. 38 CFR § 3.304(f) (2023). When the VA
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           373

                      Opinion of the Court

fnds those conditions satisfed, it assigns a disability rating
that refects reductions in earning capacity. 38 U. S. C.
§ 1155; 38 CFR § 4.130. This rating determines the amount
of compensation a veteran receives.
   A veteran begins the claims process by submitting a re-
quest for benefts to the VA. A VA regional offce then ad-
judicates the claim. If the regional offce issues an adverse
decision, the veteran may seek de novo review from the
Board of Veterans' Appeals. The Board is an administrative
body within the VA that renders fnal decisions for the
agency. 38 U. S. C. §§ 7101, 7104(a).
   Congress designed the VA's adjudicatory process to func-
tion “ `with a high degree of informality and solicitude for
the claimant.' ” Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 U. S. 428, 431
(2011) (quoting Walters v. National Assn. of Radiation Sur-
vivors, 473 U. S. 305, 311 (1985)). For example, Congress
imposes no statute of limitations on a veteran's claim for
Page Proof Pending Publication
benefts. The process at both the regional offces and the
Board is ex parte and nonadversarial. 38 CFR §§ 3.103(a),
20.700(c). And, the VA must assist veterans in developing
the evidence necessary to substantiate their claims. 38
U. S. C. § 5103A(a)(1).
   Congress also requires the regional offces and the Board
to give veterans the beneft of the doubt on close issues.
Specifcally, the VA must “consider all information and lay
and medical evidence of record,” and, “[w]hen there is an
approximate balance of positive and negative evidence re-
garding any issue material to the determination of a matter,
the [VA] shall give the beneft of the doubt to the claimant.”
§ 5107(b). This rule refects a pro-veteran policy choice that
dates back to the post-Civil War era. See 50 Fed. Reg.
34454 (1985).
   A veteran who receives an adverse decision from the
Board may appeal to the Veterans Court, an Article I tribu-
nal. The Veterans Court has exclusive jurisdiction to re-
view fnal decisions of the Board. § 7252(a).
374                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

   Section 7261 defnes the scope of the Veterans Court's re-
view. Subsection (a), which sets forth the court's adjudica-
tory powers, is modeled after the scope-of-review provision
in the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). See 5 U. S. C.
§ 706. It empowers the Veterans Court to decide relevant
questions of law; to compel action unlawfully withheld or un-
reasonably delayed; and to hold unlawful and set aside VA
fndings, conclusions, rules, and regulations that are arbi-
trary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in
accordance with law. 38 U. S. C. §§ 7261(a)(1)–(3). Unlike
the APA, however, § 7261(a) imposes a slightly different
standard of review for factual fndings. The Veterans Court
may set aside or reverse a factual fnding only if “the fnding
is clearly erroneous,” in contrast to the APA's “substantial
evidence” standard. § 7261(a)(4); see Dickinson v. Zurko,
527 U. S. 150, 153, 162–163 (1999) (examining the “subtle”
difference between the two standards).
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Subsection (b) sets forth additional requirements that the
Veterans Court must follow “[i]n making the determinations
under subsection (a).” § 7261(b). As originally enacted,
the provision required only that the Veterans Court “ `take
due account of the rule of prejudicial error.' ” Veterans' Ju-
dicial Review Act, § 301(a), 102 Stat. 4115 (now codifed at
38 U. S. C. § 7261(b)(2)). We have held that this statutory
command requires the Veterans Court to apply the same
kind of harmless-error rule that courts ordinarily apply in
civil cases. Shinseki v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396, 406 (2009).
   In 2002, Congress amended subsection (b) to add the provi-
sion at issue here. Veterans Benefts Act, § 401(b), 116 Stat.
2832. Codifed at § 7261(b)(1), it directs the Veterans Court
to “ `take due account of the [VA]'s application of section
5107(b) of this title.' ” In other words, when conducting ju-
dicial review under subsection (a), the Veterans Court must
“take due account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-
the-doubt rule.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           375

                     Opinion of the Court

   In most cases, an appeal to the Veterans Court is a veter-
an's fnal opportunity for judicial review of a benefts deci-
sion. Although veterans may appeal certain legal issues to
the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit,
see § 7292, that court has held that it lacks jurisdiction to
review most factual determinations, including whether the
VA properly applied the beneft-of-the-doubt rule in individ-
ual cases, see Ferguson v. Principi, 273 F. 3d 1072, 1076
(2001).
                              B
   Petitioners are veterans who applied for service-connected
PTSD disability benefts and were dissatisfed with the VA's
resolution of their claims.
                              1
  Petitioner Joshua Bufkin served in the Air Force from late
2005 to early 2006. Although Bufkin intended to join the
military police, he never received a job assignment because
Page Proof Pending Publication
he could not pass the required training classes. Bufkin
blamed his poor performance on marital stress. He re-
ported that his wife opposed his service and had threatened
to commit suicide if he stayed in the military. Bufkin ulti-
mately requested and obtained a nonprejudicial hardship
discharge.
  Seven years later, Bufkin sought disability benefts from
the VA. He claimed that his military service caused several
psychiatric conditions, including PTSD. To support his
PTSD claim, Bufkin submitted a letter from a VA physician
who had recently treated him. The physician explained that
Bufkin's wife suffered from depression, and that Bufkin felt
forced to make a choice between divorcing his wife or leaving
the military. The physician diagnosed Bufkin with PTSD
and opined that the primary stressor was the perceived
threat to his wife's life.
  The VA regional offce denied Bufkin's claim on the ground
that the medical evidence was insuffcient to establish a link
376                 BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Opinion of the Court

between his symptoms and his military service. Bufkin
sought reconsideration, and the VA ordered a second exami-
nation by a second VA physician. The new physician deter-
mined that Bufkin did not meet the criteria for PTSD. He
explained that the frst physician was unable to review Buf-
kin's military or medical records, a limitation that may have
had a “signifcant impact” on Bufkin's initial diagnosis.
App. in No. 2022–1089 (CA Fed.), pp. 26–27. Bufkin also
submitted letters from his wife and mother describing
changes they observed in his personality after his military
service.
   The VA regional offce reviewed the new information and
reaffrmed its denial of Bufkin's claim. Bufkin fled a notice
of disagreement. He argued that the evidence for and
against his claim was roughly equal and that he was there-
fore entitled to “the beneft of the doubt.” § 5107(b). Buf-
kin then underwent a third VA examination by yet another
Page Proof Pending Publication
physician. Like the second physician, this physician con-
cluded that Bufkin's symptoms did not meet the criteria for
PTSD. She also noted that Bufkin's symptoms started one
year after his discharge, and that no evidence indicated that
his military service caused a disability. The VA regional of-
fce again reaffrmed its decision to deny benefts.
   Bufkin appealed to the Board. While the appeal was
pending, he submitted a short statement from a fourth physi-
cian. This physician stated that, in his opinion, Bufkin suf-
fered from PTSD, but he noted other doctors might disagree
with that diagnosis. He suggested that, at a minimum, Buf-
kin suffered from severe anxiety disorder.
   The Board concluded that Bufkin did not suffer from
PTSD and denied his claim. In a detailed opinion, the Board
recounted each physician's fndings and medical conclusions.
The Board observed that one physician diagnosed Bufkin
with PTSD, two physicians determined he did not have
PTSD, and one physician thought the issue was debatable.
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)            377

                      Opinion of the Court

After carefully reviewing each medical opinion, the Board
explained that it found the second physician's report “espe-
cially persuasive.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a. The Board
noted that the one physician to diagnose Bufkin with PTSD
had not reviewed his military or medical records. The
Board also reviewed the letters from Bufkin's wife and
mother but found that they lacked probative value because
neither individual had relevant medical expertise. When
taken as a whole, the Board explained, the evidence was not
in approximate balance. Accordingly, the Board determined
that Bufkin was not entitled to the beneft of the doubt.

                                2
   Petitioner Norman Thornton served in the Army from
1988 to 1991. After being honorably discharged, Thornton
applied for and received benefts for an “ `undiagnosed ill-
ness.' ” Id., at 32a. Years later, he sought additional bene-
Page Proof Pending Publication
fts for service-connected PTSD. The VA granted benefts
for the PTSD claim, initially rating his condition as 10% disa-
bling and later increasing the rating to 30%.
   In 2015, Thornton applied for another increase to his
PTSD disability rating and underwent a new VA medical ex-
amination. The physician concluded that Thornton suffered
some common PTSD symptoms, including depressed mood,
anxiety, memory loss, and sleep impairment, but questioned
whether PTSD was the cause of those symptoms. The phy-
sician did not fnd several of the more severe symptoms that
earlier medical examinations had revealed, such as suicidal
ideation, impaired impulse control, and panic attacks. Nev-
ertheless, the regional offce increased Thornton's PTSD dis-
ability rating to 50%. Thornton then sought an additional
increase to 70% and underwent another medical evaluation,
but the regional offce maintained the 50% rating.
   Thornton appealed to the Board, which reviewed the evi-
dence de novo. As in Bufkin's case, the Board thoroughly
378                      BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                          Opinion of the Court

recounted each medical report and assessed the credibility
of each physician's fndings. The Board ultimately declined
to increase Thornton's 50% disability rating.1

                                    3
   Both petitioners appealed the Board's resolution of their
PTSD claims to the Veterans Court. They argued that the
evidence concerning their diagnoses was in “approximate
balance,” so they were entitled to the beneft of the doubt.
See § 5107(b). In both cases, the Veterans Court upheld the
Board's decisions on the ground that the Board's approximate-
balance determinations were not clearly erroneous.
   Petitioners then appealed to the Federal Circuit, chal-
lenging the Veterans Court's legal interpretation of
§ 7261(b)(1). They argued that the statutory command to
“take due account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-
the-doubt rule requires the Veterans Court to review the
Page Proof Pending Publication
entire record de novo and decide for itself whether the evi-
dence is in approximate balance.
   The Federal Circuit rejected this argument and affrmed
the Veterans Court in both cases. Bufkin v. McDonough,
75 F. 4th 1368 (2023); Thornton v. McDonough, 2023 WL
5091653 (Aug. 9, 2023). The court held that “the statutory
command that the Veterans Court `take due account' of the
beneft of the doubt rule does not require the Veterans Court
to conduct any review of the beneft of the doubt issue be-
yond the clear error review required by” § 7261(a). Id., at *2.
   We granted certiorari to decide what it means to “take
due account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-
doubt rule. 601 U. S. 1167 (2024).
  1
    At the same time, the Board granted Thornton a “total disability” rat-
ing for his separate claim of unemployability, based on the combined effect
of his service-connected PTSD and the undiagnosed illness. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 86a–89a. Thornton currently receives full benefts, but those
benefts are subject to continual review. He appeals only the denial of
the increase to his PTSD disability rating.
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)                  379

                          Opinion of the Court

                                   II
                                   A
   We start, as always, with the text. Section 7261(b)(1)
provides that “[i]n making the determinations under subsec-
tion (a),” the Veterans Court “shall” “take due account of the
[VA]'s application of [the beneft-of-the-doubt rule].”
   The plain meaning of the text reveals the scope of the Vet-
erans Court's task. It is undisputed that the word “shall”
imposes a mandatory command. Shapiro v. McManus, 577
U. S. 39, 43 (2015). “Shall” means “must.” Kingdomware
Technologies, Inc. v. United States, 579 U. S. 162, 171–172
(2016). It is likewise undisputed that to “take account of ”
something means to give it attention or consideration. See
American Heritage Dictionary 1763 (4th ed. 2000) (defning
“take account of ” as “[t]o take into consideration”). The
word “due” qualifes the attention that the VA must give.
“Due” means “appropriate” or “proper.” See 4 Oxford Eng-
Page Proof Pending Publication
lish Dictionary 1105 (2d ed. 1989) (“Merited, appropriate:
proper, right”); Black's Law Dictionary 515 (7th ed. 1999)
(“Just, proper, regular, and reasonable”).
   Taken together, the statutory command to “take due ac-
count” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule
requires the Veterans Court to give appropriate attention to
the VA's work, at least when the issue is properly presented.
See id., at 516 (defning “due consideration” as “[t]he degree
of attention properly paid to something, as the circum-
stances merit”).2
   The text makes clear that the appropriate attention due
is that which is required under subsection (a). Sec-
tion 7261(b)(1) states that the Veterans Court must “take

  2
    Petitioners invite us to decide whether the Veterans Court must ad-
dress the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule when a veteran
does not raise the issue as a ground for reversal. Because both petition-
ers adequately preserved and raised their challenges below, we leave that
question for another day.
380                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

due account” of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-
doubt rule only “[i]n making the determinations under
subsection (a).” This language highlights that taking due
account is not a freestanding task but rather an aspect of
judicial review under subsection (a).
  The upshot is straightforward. Review of the VA's
beneft-of-the-doubt decision is just another determination
made “under subsection (a).” § 7261(b)(1). Accordingly,
the standards of review provided in subsection (a) also gov-
ern the Veterans Court's review of beneft-of-the-doubt is-
sues. In particular, subsection (a) requires the Veterans
Court to review the VA's conclusions of law de novo and its
fndings of fact for clear error. See §§ 7261(a)(1) and (4).
Which standard applies will depend on whether a veteran
raises a legal or factual objection.
  Section 7261(b)(1) makes explicit the Veterans Court's pre-
viously implicit duty to review the VA's application of the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule, pursuant to the standards set forth
Page Proof Pending Publication
in subsection (a). Of course, this duty predated Congress's
enactment of § 7261(b)(1); subsection (a) always required the
Veterans Court to review all relevant fndings of fact and
conclusions of law. See §§ 7261(a)(1) and (4). But, Con-
gress's enactment underscores the beneft-of-the-doubt rule's
status as a paramount consideration.

                               B
   The next question, then, is the appropriate standard of re-
view for challenges to the VA's application of the beneft-of-
the-doubt rule. The applicable standard will vary with the
challenge, as the application of the rule has both factual and
legal components. A veteran may challenge any aspect of
the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule on
appeal.
   No one disputes that challenges to the VA's legal conclu-
sions are subject to de novo review. For example, if the
veteran argues that the VA misunderstood the defnition of
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           381

                      Opinion of the Court

“approximate balance,” the Veterans Court would construe
the challenge as a legal one and review it de novo. So too
if the veteran argues that the VA gave the beneft of the
doubt to the wrong party.
   These arguments, however, are not the typical arguments
a veteran raises on appeal. In mine-run cases, including the
two before us, a veteran challenges the VA's determination
that the evidence on a particular material issue is not in ap-
proximate balance.
   Petitioners assert that the approximate-balance determi-
nation is a legal inquiry subject to de novo review. The Gov-
ernment counters that the determination is a factual fnding,
or at least a mixed question that is predominantly factual
and reviewed for clear error. After closely examining the
way in which the VA conducts the approximate-balance in-
quiry, we conclude it is a predominantly factual question and
thus subject to clear-error review.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   The approximate-balance determination involves two
steps. First, the VA reviews each item of evidence in the
record and assigns weight to it. Both sides agree that this
aspect of the VA's analysis is factfnding reviewed only for
clear error. Second, the VA assesses the weight of the evi-
dence as a whole, deciding whether “there is an approximate
balance of positive and negative evidence” on any material
issue. § 5107(b). The VA gives the beneft of the doubt to
the veteran only after determining that the positive evidence
and negative evidence on a material issue are in approximate
balance. Otherwise, the VA simply resolves the issue in
favor of the party with the more persuasive evidence.
   The second step—deciding whether the evidence as a
whole is approximately balanced—has both legal and factual
components. The task is partly factual because it involves
marshaling and weighing evidence. See U. S. Bank N. A. v.
Village at Lakeridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 396 (2018). The
VA must categorize the evidence based on whether it sup-
ports or undermines the veteran's claim. After doing so,
382                      BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                          Opinion of the Court

the VA compares the relative strength and persuasiveness of
the evidence on each side. Assigning weight to evidence—
whether individual pieces of evidence or collections of it—is
an inherently factual task. See ibid. But, the VA's decision
also involves a legal determination. After assessing the
weight of the assorted evidence, the VA must decide whether
the evidence is in “approximate balance.” See § 5107(b).
In other words, the VA must determine whether the evi-
dence satisfies a legal standard. Because the VA's
approximate-balance determination involves both legal and
factual work, it is at most a mixed question, not a purely
legal one.3
   The appropriate standard of review for a mixed question
depends “on whether answering it entails primarily legal or
factual work.” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396. Some mixed
questions require a court to “expound on the law” by “ampli-
fying or elaborating on a broad legal standard.” Ibid.
Page Proof Pending Publication
When applying the law involves developing legal principles
for use in future cases, appellate courts typically review the
decision de novo. Ibid. Other mixed questions require
courts to resolve “case-specific factual issues. ” Ibid.
When the tribunal below is “immerse[d]” in facts and com-
pelled to “marshal and weigh evidence” and “make credibil-
ity judgments,” the appellate court “should usually review a
decision with deference.” Ibid.
   Reviewing a determination whether record evidence is ap-
proximately balanced is “about as factual sounding” as any
question gets. Id., at 397. Consider Bufkin's case. To de-

  3
    We need not decide whether the VA's approximate-balance determina-
tion is best characterized as a mixed question or a factual one. See Alex-
ander v. South Carolina State Conference of the NAACP, 602 U. S. 1, 18–
19 (2024) (observing that “a fnding of fact” may involve application of a
“standard of proof ” with a “substantial legal component”). Whether the
determination is mixed or factual, clear-error review is appropriate be-
cause it is at least predominantly factual.
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)            383

                      Opinion of the Court

cide whether Bufkin was entitled to the beneft of the doubt,
the Board reviewed four medical opinions and two letters
from Bufkin's family members. After assigning weight to
each item, the Board assessed whether the evidence was
roughly equal. To make that determination, the Board had
to consider evidence of Bufkin's symptoms and their causes,
while assessing the credibility of the physicians who treated
him. Thornton's case is no different. The Board assessed
the weight of his symptoms, the degree to which they af-
fected his day-to-day life, and the credibility of each physi-
cian. These cases illustrate that the approximate-balance
determination necessarily immerses the Board “in case-
specifc factual issues.” Id., at 396. When that is so—that
is, when the initial decisionmaker is “marshal[ing] and
weigh[ing] evidence” and “mak[ing] credibility judgments”—
its work is fact intensive, and its determinations should be
reviewed with deference. Ibid.

Page Proof Pending
              C    Publication
   Petitioners and the dissent offer various paths to a differ-
ent result. But, their arguments are not persuasive.
   First, petitioners urge us to hold that with one modest
phrase, “take due account,” Congress imposed a new stand-
ard of review for challenges to the VA's application of the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule. Before the Federal Circuit, peti-
tioners argued that § 7261(b)(1) established a de novo stand-
ard of review. They hesitate to call the standard “de novo
review” before this Court, instead describing it as “APA-
plus.” Brief for Petitioners 25, 41–42.
   However labeled, the directive to “take due account” does
not do the work that petitioners envision. Had Congress
intended to impose a new standard of review for challenges
to the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule, it
would have clearly named a standard—just as it did in
§ 7261(a). But, as we have explained, Congress chose not to
384                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

announce any new standard in § 7261(b)(1). It instead incor-
porated the pre-existing standards of review set forth in sub-
section (a).
   Petitioners contend, in the alternative, that even if
§ 7261(b)(1) incorporates the standards of review in § 7261(a),
the VA's approximate-balance determination is a legal ques-
tion subject to de novo review under § 7261(a). The dissent
adopts a similar view, arguing that the approximate-balance
determination is a predominantly legal mixed question.
Post, at 398–402 (opinion of Jackson, J.).
   The de novo standard applies, they say, because the
approximate-balance determination resembles other legal or
predominantly legal questions that courts review de novo.
They point to judicial review of a court's probable-cause de-
termination as one such analogue. Post, at 401. Probable
cause is the standard by which a court assesses whether a
police offcer's search or seizure was permissible under
Page Proof Pending Publication
the Fourth Amendment. For example, “probable cause to
search . . . exist[s] where the known facts and circumstances
are suffcient to warrant a man of reasonable prudence in the
belief that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found.”
Ornelas v. United States, 517 U. S. 690, 696 (1996). We have
held that this inquiry is a mixed question that courts review
de novo. See id., at 699.
   Two features of the probable-cause determination distin-
guish it from the approximate-balance determination, how-
ever, and underscore why courts review it de novo. First,
because probable cause is a constitutional standard, we start
with a strong presumption that determinations under that
standard are subject to de novo review, even if they require
courts to “plung[e] into a factual record.” U. S. Bank, 583
U. S., at 396, n. 4. Second, probable cause at bottom poses
a question that requires substantial “legal work.” Id., at
398. Because probable cause asks whether the “offcer's un-
derstanding of the facts and his understanding of the rele-
vant law” was “reasonable,” Heien v. North Carolina, 574
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)             385

                      Opinion of the Court

U. S. 54, 61–64 (2014), it requires an objective, legally
grounded inquiry as to what a hypothetical person could
have found, see Kentucky v. King, 563 U. S. 452, 464 (2011).
The answer to how a hypothetical person would act is, by its
nature, one that courts refne over time, building out princi-
ples that “acquire content only through application.” Or-
nelas, 517 U. S., at 697. De novo review is therefore essen-
tial so that courts can ensure “unif[orm] precedent” that will
“provid[e] law enforcement offcers with a defned set of rules
which, in most instances, makes it possible to reach a correct
determination beforehand as to whether an invasion of pri-
vacy is justifed.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
   The VA's approximate-balance determination differs on
both counts. First, the standard is a creature of statute.
Because it does not dwell “[i]n the constitutional realm,” it
is not entitled to the presumption of de novo review that
applies to probable cause. U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396, n. 4.
Page Proof Pending Publication
Second, the approximate-balance inquiry does not have a
comparable legal component. Instead, as these cases exem-
plify, that inquiry tends to be case specifc and fact intensive,
with courts evaluating the weight of the evidence for and
against a particular veteran's claim. To decide Bufkin's
claim, for example, the VA reviewed a panoply of medical
and lay evidence, and Bufkin's central argument before the
Veterans Court was that the overall balance of this evidence
was closer than the VA thought. Thornton's claim similarly
presented case-specifc, fact-bound issues about the existence
and severity of symptoms. Resolution of these claims is un-
likely to generate guidance for the VA or future courts in
the way that probable-cause precedents do for police and
the courts.
   The VA's approximate-balance determination is likewise
distinct from a court's conclusion that evidence is suffcient to
support a criminal conviction, a conclusion that courts review
de novo. See Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307, 318–319
(1979). While the suffciency-of-the-evidence inquiry neces-
386                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

sarily turns on facts, the reviewing court does not decide
for itself whether the evidence establishes guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Instead, it construes all evidence and
makes all reasonable inferences in favor of the prosecution,
and asks whether “any rational trier of fact could have found
the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable
doubt.” Id., at 319. Courts therefore conduct their review
through a legal lens, applying a hypothetical, objective
standard and putting a thumb on the scale in favor of the
prevailing party—the prosecution. No one—petitioners and
the dissent included—wants the Veterans Court to do that.
Instead, petitioners and the dissent would have the Veterans
Court “weigh the evidence” in the frst instance and then
make “inferences from basic facts to ultimate facts”—
precisely what a court may not do on suffciency review.
Ibid.
   Petitioners and the dissent also rely heavily on the asser-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tion that our reading of § 7261(b)(1) renders the provision
superfuous. Post, at 395–397. That objection is a serious
one. “We are reluctant to treat statutory terms as surplus-
age in any setting.” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31
(2001) (internal quotation marks omitted). Our reluctance
increases when Congress amends a statute, as we ordinarily
presume that when Congress does so, “ `it intends its amend-
ment to have real and substantial effect.' ” Intel Corp. v.
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 542 U. S. 241, 258–259 (2004).
   But, our reading of § 7261(b)(1) gives that provision a func-
tion, even if it might involve some redundancy. As we have
explained, Congress's amendment makes express the Veter-
ans Court's obligation to review challenges to the VA's appli-
cation of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule according to the stand-
ards set forth in § 7261(a). Moreover, as the dissent notes,
we have left open the possibility that Congress's enactment
requires the Veterans Court to review the VA's application
of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule even if the veteran fails to
present that issue on appeal. See n. 2, supra; post, at 396.
                    Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)             387

                       Opinion of the Court

If the Court were to decide that Congress's enactment
changed the party-presentation requirement, then the enact-
ment of § 7261(b)(1) would serve an additional independent
function.
   Notably, the dissent fails to offer a reading of the text that
avoids redundancy. According to the dissent, the VA's
approximate-balance determination is a predominantly legal
question subject to de novo review. Post, at 399–402. But,
if the dissent were correct, then the approximate-balance
determination would have been subject to de novo review
even before the enactment of § 7261(b)(1). All agree that
under § 7261(a), which predated Congress's enactment of
§ 7261(b)(1), the Veterans Court is required to review ques-
tions of law de novo. Thus, under the dissent's interpre-
tation—no less than ours—the enactment of § 7261(b)(1)
merely underscores a pre-existing duty. The canon against
surplusage can be meaningful when a competing interpreta-
tion would avoid superfuity. Microsoft Corp. v. i4i L. P.,
Page Proof Pending Publication
564 U. S. 91, 106 (2011). But, when both interpretations in-
volve the same redundancy, the canon against surplusage
simply does not apply. See Marx v. General Revenue Corp.,
568 U. S. 371, 385 (2013) (declining to apply the canon against
surplusage when no interpretation would give effect to
every word).
   In any event, “[s]ometimes the better overall reading of
the statute contains some redundancy.” Rimini Street, Inc.
v. Oracle USA, Inc., 586 U. S. 334, 346 (2019). Here, the
text leaves no doubt that the Federal Circuit's reading of the
statute is the better one.

                          *      *      *
  Section 7261(b)(1) does not establish a new standard of re-
view for challenges to the VA's application of the beneft-of-
the-doubt rule. Instead, it requires the Veterans Court to
apply the appropriate standard of review under § 7261(a).
Because the VA's approximate-balance determination is a
388                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

predominantly factual question, the Veterans Court reviews
it for clear error. § 7261(a)(4).

                              III
  The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affrmed.

                                               It is so ordered.
  Justice Jackson, with whom Justice Gorsuch joins,
dissenting.
   The Court draws two conclusions from today's evaluation
of Congress's “take due account” admonition. See 38
U. S. C. § 7261(b)(1). First, it holds that when the United
States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Veterans
Court) reviews the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA's)
application of the “beneft-of-the-doubt” rule, that appellate
tribunal must use the “same” standards of review that apply
Page Proof Pending Publication
to its assessment of any other VA claims determination.
Ante, at 372. Second, the Court concludes that whether evi-
dence is in “approximate balance” for purposes of the beneft-
of-the-doubt rule is a “predominantly factual determination”
to be reviewed only for clear error. Ibid.
   The majority is wrong in both respects. Nothing about
the text, context, or drafting history of subsection (b)(1)
demonstrates that “take due account” actually means “pro-
ceed as normal.” Reading the provision in that fashion, as
the majority does, makes little sense. That interpretation
is also inconsistent with how we have treated identical
language elsewhere in this same statute and renders
meaningless the “take due account” command that Congress
specifcally amended § 7261(b) to insert.
   The majority's clear-error conclusion fares no better, inso-
far as its reasoning ignores what appellate courts do and
what we have consistently said about substantially similar
circumstances. That is, even if the majority were correct
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           389

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

that subsection (b)(1) instructs the Veterans Court to carry
on applying the usual standards, clear-error review would
not be appropriate because whether the VA properly applied
the beneft-of-the-doubt rule does not present a question of
fact. The VA's beneft-of-the-doubt determination poses, at
most, a mixed question of law and fact—and one that is sub-
stantively indistinguishable from the kinds of mixed ques-
tions that this Court has long said are subject to de novo
review on appeal.
   In short, the Court today concludes that Congress meant
nothing when it inserted subsection (b)(1) in response to con-
cerns that the Veterans Court was improperly rubberstamp-
ing the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt determinations, and also
that the Veterans Court is not obliged to do anything more
than defer to those agency decisions notwithstanding Con-
gress's “take due account” direction. I respectfully dissent.

                         I
Page    Proof      Pending          Publication
 Under the time-honored beneft-of-the-doubt rule, veter-
ans asserting claims for service-connected disabilities are
entitled to have any reasonable doubt on a material issue
resolved in their favor. Congress codifed this rule in 1988:
Section 5107(b) of Title 38 states unequivocally that the VA
must “give the beneft of the doubt to the claimant” when-
ever “there is an approximate balance of positive and nega-
tive evidence regarding any issue material to the” veteran's
benefts claim. This generous standard of proof honors the
sacrifces of those who have served in the Armed Forces.
   Recognizing the weighty interests at stake in cases that
involve benefts for veterans, Congress's 1988 legislation also
established judicial review of the VA's benefts decisions by
the Veterans Court, a specialized Article I tribunal. Section
7261(a) lays out in detail the authority that the Veterans
Court has been given. As relevant here, the Veterans
Court is authorized to (1) “decide all relevant questions of
390                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                       Jackson, J., dissenting

law”; (2) “compel action of the Secretary unlawfully withheld
or unreasonably delayed”; and (3) “hold unlawful and set
aside” certain VA decisions. §§ 7261(a)(1)–(3). Notably,
clause (4) of § 7261(a) states that “in the case of a fnding
of material fact adverse to the claimant made in reaching a
decision in a case before the [VA] with respect to benefts,”
the Veterans Court shall “hold unlawful and set aside or
reverse such fnding if the fnding is clearly erroneous.”
§ 7261(a)(4).
   For present purposes, all parties agree that § 7261(a) has
always authorized the Veterans Court to review the VA's
application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule. But judicial re-
view of that issue proved illusory from the start, because the
Veterans Court historically applied a deferential standard of
review for assessing the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt determi-
nations. See, e. g., Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57–
58 (1990); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367 (Ct. App.
Vet. Cl. 2001). As a result, veterans groups routinely com-
Page Proof Pending Publication
plained to Congress that judicial review by the Veterans
Court was inappropriately deferential. See, e. g., Hearing
before the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs, 107th
Cong., 2d Sess., 47 (2002) (statement of the legislative direc-
tor of a veterans group); see also Brief for Federal Circuit
Bar Association as Amicus Curiae 11–14.
   Congress responded in 2002, when it amended § 7261(b) to
specifcally require the Veterans Court to “take due account
of ” the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
§ 7261(b)(1). In its entirety, the amended subsection (b)
states:
         “(b) In making the determinations under subsection
      (a), the [Veterans] Court shall review the record of pro-
      ceedings before the Secretary and the Board of Veter-
      ans' Appeals . . . and shall—
         “(1) take due account of the Secretary's application of
      section 5107(b) of this title; and
                       Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)                   391

                         Jackson, J., dissenting

        “(2) take due account of the rule of pre judicial
      error.” § 7261(b).1
The plain text of § 7261(b)(1) thus requires the Veterans
Court to “take due account” of the VA's obligations under
the beneft-of-the-doubt rule when it reviews VA benefts de-
terminations under § 7261(a).

                                    II
  The dispute before us concerns the meaning of subsection
(b)(1)'s “take due account” clause. The majority and I agree
that subsection (b)(1) imposes a “statutory command” that
the Veterans Court “give appropriate attention to the VA's
work” related to its application of the beneft-of-the-doubt
rule. Ante, at 379. But the majority concludes that the
“appropriate attention due is that which is required under
subsection (a).” Ibid. In my view, that holding is un-
moored from subsection (b)(1)'s text, ignores § 7261's overall
Page Proof Pending Publication
structure and drafting history, and renders entirely super-
fuous Congress's requirement that the Veterans Court “take
due account” of the application of the beneft-of-the-doubt
rule. The better reading of the statute recognizes that sub-
section (b)(1) requires the Veterans Court to determine,
without deference, whether the VA properly applied the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
                               A
   The primary textual pillar of the majority's conclusion that
“[r]eview of the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt decision is just an-
  1
    Subsection (b)(1) cross references § 5107(b), which (as explained above
and bears repeating) codifes the beneft-of-the-doubt rule: “When there is
an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any
issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give
the beneft of the doubt to the claimant.” § 5107(b). The reference to
“the Secretary” in § 5107(b) and § 7261(b)(1) includes the VA's regional
offces and the Board of Veterans' Appeals. See ante, at 373.
392                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

other determination made `under subsection (a)' ” is its ob-
servation that subsection (b)(1)'s review applies only “ `[i]n
making the determinations under subsection (a).' ” Ante, at
380 (quoting § 7261(b)(1)). Based on that prefatory lan-
guage, the majority reasons that subsection (b)(1) is merely
an “aspect of ” the review that the Veterans Court performs
under subsection (a), such that the “standards of review pro-
vided in subsection (a) also govern the Veterans Court's re-
view of beneft-of-the-doubt issues.” Ante, at 380.
   But the fact that the Veterans Court must apply subsec-
tion (b)(1) “[i]n making the determinations under subsection
(a)” does not justify collapsing these two provisions. The
word “in,” when paired with a gerund—here, “making”—is
generally “equivalent in sense to a temporal clause intro-
duced by when, while, if, [or] in the event of.” 7 Oxford
English Dictionary 760 (2d ed. 1989) (emphasis in original).
The “in making” clause in subsection (b) thus merely pro-
Page Proof Pending Publication
vides that when the Veterans Court makes one of the deter-
minations authorized by subsection (a), it must also satisfy
its duty to “take due account of ” the VA's application of the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule. In other words, the “in making”
clause the majority seizes upon to justify its same-standards
holding simply establishes that review under subsection
(b)(1) occurs alongside review under subsection (a), not that
they are the same thing.
   Interpreting subsection (b)(1) to require a separate, con-
current review of the VA's compliance with the beneft-
of-the-doubt rule is consistent with how this Court has in-
terpreted subsection (b)(1)'s parallel provision—subsection
(b)(2). Subsection (b)(2) directs that, “[i]n making the deter-
minations under subsection (a),” the Veterans Court shall
“ take due account of the rule of pre judicial error. ”
§ 7261(b)(2). In Shinseki v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396 (2009),
we held that subsection (b)(2) “requires the Veterans Court
to apply the same kind of `harmless-error' rule that courts
ordinarily apply in civil cases,” id., at 406. We did not
                        Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)                      393

                           Jackson, J., dissenting

suggest—much less hold—that subsection (a)'s standards
of review governed subsection (b)(2)'s “take due account”
clause. To the contrary, we explained that the Veterans
Court is not prevented from “directly asking the harmless-
error question” and “resting its conclusion on the facts and
circumstances of the particular case.” Id., at 408.
   Thus, there is no dispute that, under subsection (b)(2), the
Veterans Court analyzes whether any error was harmless
de novo, without applying the standards of review prescribed
by subsection (a). And because subsection (a)'s standards
do not apply when the Veterans Court “take[s] due account
of the rule of prejudicial error” under subsection (b)(2), it
is oddly discordant for the majority to conclude that those
standards do apply when the Veterans Court “take[s] due
account of the Secretary's application of ” the beneft-of-the-
doubt rule. See FCC v. AT&T Inc., 562 U. S. 397, 408 (2011)
(“ `[I]dentical words and phrases within the same statute
should normally be given the same meaning' ”).
Page Proof Pending Publication
   An understanding of how subsection (b)(2)'s “take due ac-
count” language functions in practice further clarifes subsec-
tion (b)(1), as subsection (b)(2) existed prior to subsection
(b)(1) and plainly served as its model. The majority does not
dispute that the VA's appellate tribunal, the Board of Veterans'
Appeals, sometimes applies the rule of prejudicial error in the
frst instance. See, e. g., Medrano v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App.
165, 170 (Ct. App. Vet. Cl. 2007).2 If the Board determines
that an error was harmless and denies a veteran's claim, then
  2
     This happens often in the context of notice errors. Consistent with
the pro-claimant nature of the veterans-disability system, the VA has a
statutory obligation to notify veterans of certain information. Shinseki
v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396, 400 (2009) (citing 38 U. S. C. § 5103(a)). If the
VA breaches that duty, the Board may nonetheless deny a veteran's claim
if it determines that the notice error was harmless. The Veterans Court
reviews any such harmlessness determination de novo. See, e. g., Me-
drano, 21 Vet. App., at 170, 173; Lowery v. McDonough, 2024 WL 3949253,
*4, *5–*6 (Ct. App. Vet. Cl., Aug. 27, 2024) (unpublished); Weaver v. Shinseki,
2011 WL 2745773, *1 (Ct. App. Vet. Cl., July 13, 2011) (unpublished).
394                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Jackson, J., dissenting

per subsection (b)(2), the Veterans Court reviews the record
for prejudicial error and does so “de novo, in other words,
without any deference to the Board,” before affrming. Id.,
at 171. Subsection (b)(1) works in precisely the same way:
If the Veterans Court is inclined to affrm the VA's denial of
benefts, subsection (b)(1) requires it to frst confrm de novo
that the beneft-of-the-doubt rule was properly applied.

                                B
   Nor does the drafting history of the relevant provisions
support the majority's contention that subsection (b)(1) is an
“aspect” of subsection (a), or that subsection (a)(4) substan-
tively limits the review that subsection (b)(1) requires. In
fact, the historical account suggests the opposite. The ini-
tial Senate bill amended subsection (a)(4)—rather than sub-
section (b)—to command that the Veterans Court “tak[e] into
account” the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
Page Proof Pending Publication
S. Rep. No. 107–234, p. 40 (2002) (italics deleted). That bill
also proposed two other relevant changes: It authorized the
Veterans Court to “reverse” the VA's factual fndings rather
than remand them, and it eliminated the “clearly erroneous”
standard of review. Ibid. (italics deleted). Accordingly,
under the Senate's bill, subsection (a)(4) would have author-
ized the Veterans Court to “set aside or reverse” any factual
fnding of the VA that was “unsupported by substantial evi-
dence of record, taking into account the Secretary's applica-
tion of ” the beneft-of-the-doubt rule. Ibid. (italics deleted).
   Had Congress adopted this proposal, the majority's con-
fation of subsections (a) and (b)(1) might stand on frmer
ground. But Congress plainly rejected that approach. It
instead amended subsection (a)(4) only to empower the Vet-
erans Court to reverse certain factual fndings (i. e., those
that are material and adverse to the claimant), and neither
modifed subsection (a)(4)'s clear-error standard nor inserted
a requirement that the Veterans Court review the VA's ap-
plication of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule into that provision.
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)             395

                      Jackson, J., dissenting

§ 401, 116 Stat. 2832. At the end of the day, then, instead of
incorporating a beneft-of-the-doubt-rule reminder into sub-
section (a)(4), Congress crafted an entirely new statutory
provision—subsection (b)(1)—to address judicial review of
the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule. Ibid.
   Recognizing that review under subsection (b)(1) is distinct
from review under subsection (a)(4) respects Congress's
choice to separate those two provisions. It also comports
with subsection (b)(1)'s language and the statute's overall
design. No one disputes that Congress sought to subject
the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt decisions to increased judicial
scrutiny while otherwise preserving the VA's not-clearly-
erroneous factual fndings. Reading subsection (b)(1) to be
such a congressional mandate furthers that objective, while
the majority's conclusion that subsection (b)(1) implicitly in-
corporates subsection (a)(4)'s limited clear-error standard
undermines it.
                              C
Page    Proof Pending Publication
 The usual indicators of statutory meaning thus confrm
that subsection (b)(1) was meant to have bite. But the ma-
jority's reading renders it toothless. According to the ma-
jority, subsection (b)(1) does not impose any new obligation
on the Veterans Court; instead, that provision merely “un-
derscores” the importance of § 5107(b)'s beneft-of-the-doubt
rule. Ante, at 380. At oral argument, the Government put
the matter even more bluntly, arguing that subsection (b)(1)
is an “exclamation point” that does “duplicate work” and
is ultimately “redundant.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 42, 44. This
interpretation, which the majority adopts, violates the
“cardinal principle of statutory construction” that courts or-
dinarily “ ` “give effect, if possible, to every clause and word
of a statute.” ' ” Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 404
(2000) (quoting United States v. Menasche, 348 U. S. 528,
538–539 (1955)).
   The majority acknowledges that the surplusage argument
is “a serious one” and that its interpretation “might involve
396                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

some redundancy.” Ante, at 386. Still, the majority main-
tains that subsection (b)(1) has a “function” even if it per-
forms zero independent work. Ibid. That is because, as
the majority sees it, subsection (b)(1) makes “express” the
Veterans Court's duty to hear challenges to the VA's applica-
tion of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule under subsection (a), and
may even require the Veterans Court to do so sua sponte.
Ibid. But the majority cannot overcome the surplusage
problem simply by asserting that subsection (b)(1) empha-
sizes or clarifes a pre-existing duty. To state the obvious,
“most superfuous language” can be justifed as providing
“clarity.” NLRB v. SW General, Inc., 580 U. S. 288, 304
(2017). Perhaps for this reason, the majority does not iden-
tify any other case in which this Court held that Congress
passed an amendment with no substantive effect.
   Moreover, the majority does not and cannot explain why
any such expression of the Veterans Court's duties was
Page Proof Pending Publication
needed—much less why Congress would go out of its way
to amend the statute to underscore an existing obligation.
Subsection (a) covers the waterfront of possible exercises
of judicial authority and has always required the Veter-
ans Court to consider any argument “presented” by a vet-
eran. Subsection (a) cannot be reasonably read to exclude
consideration of a veteran's claim that the VA misapplied the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule. And no one actually thought this;
indeed, prior to Congress's enactment of subsection (b)(1),
the Veterans Court regularly considered challenges to the
VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule—it just did
so deferentially. See supra, at 390.
   Thus, the problem that Congress enacted subsection (b)(1)
to address was not that the Veterans Court seemed to have
limited authority under subsection (a). Nor was it that the
Veterans Court was somehow unaware of its duty to review
the VA's application of the beneft-of-the doubt rule upon re-
quest. Rather, as I have explained, Congress enacted sub-
section (b)(1) after veterans service organizations brought to
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)            397

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

its attention how the Veterans Court was performing that
review—i. e., it was giving too much deference to the VA's
beneft-of-the-doubt determinations. Ibid. Congress's in-
disputable focus was on the improper degree of deference the
Veterans Court was affording to the VA's determinations, a
target that the majority's reading misses completely. Nor
is the majority's surplusage problem solved by the “possibil-
ity” that subsection (b)(1) requires sua sponte review of
the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt determinations. Ante, at 386.
Even assuming that subsection (b)(1) seeks to effect that
change, sua sponte review would make no difference unless
the Veterans Court proceeds nondeferentially. A rubber-
stamp applied to every case remains a rubberstamp.
    Finally, the majority maintains that if Congress had in-
tended for subsection (b)(1) to do anything other than under-
score the pre-existing duty to consider challenges to the VA's
beneft-of-the-doubt determinations, it would have more
clearly said so. Ante, at 383–384. That gets things exactly
Page Proof Pending Publication
backwards. Ordinarily, when Congress amends a statute,
“ ` “we presume it intends its amendment to have real and
substantial effect.” ' ” Husky Int'l Electronics, Inc. v. Ritz,
578 U. S. 355, 359 (2016) (quoting United States v. Quality
Stores, Inc., 572 U. S. 141, 148 (2014)). The majority instead
presumes that Congress intended to enact a do-nothing
amendment. But if Congress had wanted to maintain the
status quo, why enact subsection (b)(1) at all? The pre-
sumption is, and should be, that Congress expects a change
when it goes through the trouble of amending a statute.
And, here, the majority's reasoning has plainly failed to over-
come that presumption.
                                D
  The veterans canon resolves whatever lingering doubt
might remain about the proper interpretation of subsection
(b)(1). We have “long applied `the canon that provisions for
benefts to members of the Armed Services are to be con-
strued in the benefciaries' favor.' ” Henderson v. Shinseki,
398                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

562 U. S. 428, 441 (2011) (quoting King v. St. Vincent's Hospi-
tal, 502 U. S. 215, 220–221, n. 9 (1991)). Likewise, under the
veterans canon, “interpretive doubt is to be resolved in the
veteran's favor.” Brown v. Gardner, 513 U. S. 115, 118
(1994).
   The veterans canon strongly supports interpreting subsec-
tion (b)(1) to represent more than Congress's grandiloquence.
Requiring subsection (b)(1) to affect the judicial review the
Veterans Court provides aligns with the signifcance of the
beneft-of-the-doubt rule and mitigates the unique problems
that arise in veterans' cases, including that veterans are
“often unrepresented” before the VA. Sanders, 556 U. S., at
412. Veterans' claims also often involve a considerable time
lag that produces problems of proof, since no statute of limi-
tations applies to such claims. D. Nagin, The Credibility
Trap: Notes on a VA Evidentiary Standard, 45 U. Memphis
L. Rev. 887, 894, 898 (2015). An appeal to the Veterans
Court is generally a veteran's “fnal opportunity” to correct
Page Proof Pending Publication
the VA's mistakes. Ante, at 375. Nondeferential review of
the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt determinations plainly mini-
mizes the risk that veterans with borderline claims will be
denied benefts to which they are entitled.
   Therefore, the veterans canon “garnish[es] an already
solid argument” based on the statute's text and structure.
Arellano v. McDonough, 598 U. S. 1, 14 (2023). Reading
subsection (b)(1) as a standalone command that requires the
Veterans Court to review the VA's application of the beneft-
of-the-doubt rule nondeferentially obviously favors veterans
more than an interpretation that reduces the provision to an
exclamation point.
                               III
   The majority does not stop at the mistaken conclusion that
Congress enacted subsection (b)(1) for no reason other than
to reiterate the Veterans Court's pre-existing statutory du-
ties. It also proceeds to analyze how a challenge to the VA's
application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule fares when fl-
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           399

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

tered through the authority conferred to the Veterans Court
in subsection (a). In this regard, the majority reasons that
part—but not all—of the VA's application of the beneft-of-
the-doubt rule must be reviewed for clear error. Ante, at
380. But in my view, the Court mischaracterizes the “ap-
proximate balance” assessment under § 5107(b), which is the
part of the analysis that is at issue here. The majority
maintains that that aspect of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule
involves the type of predominately factual fnding that appel-
late courts ordinarily review with deference. Ante, at 382–
383. Stated simply, such is not the case.

                                A
   To understand the majority's mistake, one must frst be
clear eyed about the two steps that are necessary for the
Veterans Court to review the VA's application of the beneft-
of-the-doubt rule. First, the Veterans Court identifes and
Page Proof Pending Publication
reviews the VA's relevant factual fndings concerning the evi-
dence presented. Then, the Veterans Court determines
whether, based on the VA's plausible factual fndings, the
“positive and negative evidence” is in “approximate balance”
(what I call the approximate-balance standard).
   All agree that the clear-error standard applies to the VA's
factual fndings regarding the evidence that the Veterans
Court examines at step one. So, for example, the Veterans
Court must accept the VA's determination that a particular
piece of evidence is reliable or that an individual medical
examiner is qualifed, unless those fndings are clearly er-
roneous. It is at the second step—when the Veterans
Court determines whether the evidence is in approximate
balance—that questions of law come in.
   At step two, the Veterans Court is essentially being asked
to decide whether a legal standard (“approximate balance”)
has been satisfed on the established facts. As a general
matter, this Court has long treated the application of a legal
standard to a given set of facts as an exercise that poses a
400                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Jackson, J., dissenting

legal question. See, e. g., Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr, 589
U. S. 221, 227–228 (2020). What the majority misses in its
effort to shoehorn § 5107(b)'s approximate-balance inquiry
into the question-of-fact category is the true nature of that
assessment, as well as the fact that making the approximate-
balance determination is more nuanced than simply weighing
the evidence on hand.
   For one thing, the court must have a standard for deciding
when the evidence before it is in “approximate balance” as a
matter of law. In our common-law legal system, devising
that standard happens over time, on a case-by-case basis.
Therefore, applying it might well involve examining Veter-
ans Court precedents concerning the meaning of “approxi-
mate balance,” as well as past cases that establish when and
under what circumstances certain kinds of evidence will be
found to qualify. One can easily imagine a body of case law
developing to illuminate the substantive and procedural con-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tours of the approximate-balance inquiry and the factors that
are to be considered. Thus, applying § 5107(b)'s “approxi-
mate balance” test is in no way akin to “fnding” a “material
fact” that is ultimately subject to subsection (a)(4)'s clear-
error review, as even the Government appeared to concede
at oral argument. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 59. Rather, applica-
tion of the “approximate balance” test presents a “classic
mixed question of law” that requires applying a “legal stand-
ard” to “historical facts.” Ibid.
   Where Congress has not prescribed a standard of review
for evaluating a mixed question, the appropriate degree of
deference refects “the nature of the mixed question” and
“which kind of court . . . is better suited to resolve it.” U. S.
Bank N. A. v. Village at Lakeridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 395
(2018) (citing Miller v. Fenton, 474 U. S. 104, 114 (1985)). In
general, trial courts' “expertise” as factfnders justifes def-
erence to their factual determinations. Anderson v. Besse-
mer City, 470 U. S. 564, 574–575 (1985). For this reason,
appellate courts “usually” review with deference mixed
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           401

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

questions that require resolving “case-specifc factual is-
sues.” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396. But, as I have already
explained, that is not what is happening here.
   Even if the majority is correct to assume that § 5107(b)'s
“approximate balance” standard calls for a mere head-to-
head weighing of the positive and negative evidence, that is
still an insuffcient basis upon which to rest the majority's
clear-error conclusion, because deference is “not always”
given regarding such fact-specifc inquiries. Ibid., n. 4.
There are circumstances where de novo review is appro-
priate “even when answering a mixed question primarily in-
volves plunging into a factual record.” Ibid.
   Consider one common example. Whether probable cause
existed to support a search or seizure in the Fourth Amend-
ment context is a mixed question of law and fact that appel-
late courts review de novo. Ornelas v. United States, 517
U. S. 690, 696–699 (1996). And review of probable-cause de-
Page Proof Pending Publication
terminations proceeds in two steps, just like the
approximate-balance inquiry. At step one, the appellate
court identifes the relevant historical facts and reviews
them for clear error. Id., at 696–697, 699. At step two, the
court decides whether an objectively reasonable police offcer
would believe that those facts establish probable cause to
search. Id., at 696–697. The second step is a legal question
that asks whether the facts satisfy a legal standard. Ibid.
   Another highly fact-sensitive inquiry is whether evidence
presented at trial is suffcient to support a verdict—and ap-
pellate courts review that determination de novo as well. In
a civil case, the trial court may grant judgment to a moving
party as a matter of law after the nonmoving “party has
been fully heard on an issue during a jury trial,” if it “fnds
that a reasonable jury would not have a legally suffcient
evidentiary basis to fnd for the party on that issue.” Fed.
Rule Civ. Proc. 50(a)(1). When making this decision, the
trial judge determines whether, reviewing the facts in the
light most favorable to the nonmovant, the evidence is suff-
402                       BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                          Jackson, J., dissenting

cient to meet the applicable evidentiary standard. Reeves
v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U. S. 133, 150
(2000); see also 9B C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice
and Procedure § 2524 (3d ed. 2008) (explaining that the
suffciency-of-the-evidence inquiry is a legal question deter-
mined by the court). And, on appeal, the reviewing court
undertakes the same suffciency analysis by evaluating the
evidence without any deference to the trial court's determi-
nation. Ibid.; see also Reeves, 530 U. S., at 150.3
   These examples demonstrate that nondeferential appellate
review of factbound legal issues is not unprecedented. And
under § 7261(b)(1), the Veterans Court must follow suit.
Section 7261(b)(1) directs the Veterans Court to evaluate the
VA's approximate-balance decisions by frst accepting the
agency's not-clearly-erroneous factual fndings about the evi-
dence presented and then determining whether that evi-
dence satisfes the approximate-balance standard, without
deference to the VA's own conclusions. This analysis—
Page Proof Pending Publication
which “has both legal and factual components,” ante, at
381—is plainly analogous to the suffciency-of-evidence and
probable-cause questions that appellate courts regularly re-
view de novo.
                               B
  The majority dismisses these compelling parallels on the
grounds that assessing the suffciency of the evidence or deter-
mining the existence of probable cause are more “legal” than
the approximate-balance inquiry. Ante, at 384–385. The
majority further emphasizes that evaluating whether the ev-
idence is approximately balanced for § 5107(b) purposes is a
“fact intensive” inquiry that is better left to the “tribunal
below” than the appeals court. Ante, at 382–383. It also
unfurls a surplusage argument of its own: If de novo review
  3
    In criminal cases, too, whether evidence is legally suffcient to support
a conviction is reviewed de novo, considering the evidence in the light
most favorable to the prosecution. Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307,
318–319 (1979).
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           403

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

applies to the VA's approximate-balance determination, the
majority says, then subsection (b)(1) is superfuous under
petitioners' interpretation because that determination
“would have been subject to de novo review even before the
enactment of § 7261(b)(1).” Ante, at 387.
   None of this reasoning is persuasive. To start, the major-
ity's efforts to distinguish suffciency and probable-cause re-
view from the approximate-balance inquiry fall fat. For ex-
ample, according to the majority, the probable-cause inquiry
is distinguishable because reviewing courts assess probable
cause from the standpoint of an objectively reasonable off-
cer, and courts are required to consider and “refne over
time” what a “hypothetical person” would deem reasonable
as a matter of law. Ante, at 384–385. The majority says
that suffciency challenges likewise require courts to use a
“legal lens, applying a hypothetical, objective standard”—
i. e., what a reasonable jury could fnd. Ante, at 386.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   But the approximate-balance inquiry is not meaningfully
different. Before the Veterans Court can determine
whether the VA erred in deciding that the positive and nega-
tive evidence is not in “approximate balance,” it must frst
have an understanding of what “balanced” evidence looks
like in this context. Identifying “balance” might involve a
hypothetical and objective examination of the evidence—just
like a review of the suffciency of the evidence or probable
cause. Imagine two doctors testify in favor of a claimant's
diagnosis and two doctors testify against it. Does the mere
fact that the same number of witnesses are presented on
both sides mean that the evidence is “balanced,” as a legal
matter? The Veterans Court would need to develop a legal
rule to decide. It would also need to decide how the quality
of the evidence factors in: What if one of the doctors is the
Nobel laureate who discovered the condition at issue while
others are recent medical-school graduates? Does the testi-
mony of a doctor who has examined the claimant balance
evenly against one who has not?
404                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

   It is thus quite likely that legal standards will need to
be developed to govern the assessment of “approximate
balance”—which is why the majority is wrong to contend
that resolving approximate-balance challenges will rarely
produce generally applicable precedents. Ante, at 385–386.
Regardless, the mere fact that the assignment here involves
a fact-intensive and “multi-faceted” decision—such that
“ `one determination will seldom be a useful “precedent” for
another' ”—should not impede our recognition of the signif-
cant questions of law that are embedded in the application
of the approximate-balance standard. Ornelas, 517 U. S., at
698; see also Dupree v. Younger, 598 U. S. 729, 734 (2023)
(observing that suffciency challenges “depend on . . . the
facts”).
   The majority's attempt to distinguish probable cause from
the approximate-balance standard because the latter is “a
creature of statute,” ante, at 385, is similarly off base. To
Page Proof Pending Publication
be sure, application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule is not
constitutional in nature. But this principle is not a mere
statutory creation, either—it predates § 5107(b) and in fact
“dates back to the post-Civil War era.” Ante, at 373 (citing
50 Fed. Reg. 34454 (1985)); see also, e. g., H. R. Rep. No.
387, 46th Cong., 3d Sess., 132–133 (1881) (testimony of a
Bureau of Pensions physician explaining that when the evi-
dence left “room for doubt” regarding the extent of a veter-
an's disability, the practice was to “give him the beneft of
the doubt” if “he appear[ed] like an honest man”). In any
event, the majority does not explain why the statutory-
versus-constitutional distinction has any rational bearing on
the amount of deference the Veterans Court owes to the VA's
beneft-of-the-doubt determinations.
   Speaking of statutes, it is also signifcant that, under the
judicial review scheme Congress has crafted for veterans'
benefts claims, the Veterans Court is no ordinary appellate
tribunal. The thrust of the majority's reasoning seems to
be that, as an “appellate court,” the Veterans Court should
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)           405

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

do what appeals courts typically do: defer to the lower tribu-
nal's assessment of these “ `case-specifc factual issues.' ”
Ante, at 383. But the “contrast between ordinary civil liti-
gation” and the statutory requirements for adjudicating
veterans' benefts claims “could hardly be more dramatic.”
Henderson, 562 U. S., at 440.
   To begin, the institutional advantages that generally war-
rant deference to trial courts on factual issues do not exist
in this context, because the fnal decisionmaker for the VA—
the Board of Veterans' Appeals—is itself an appellate body.
See id., at 431 (citing §§ 7101, 7104(a)). What is more, the
Veterans Court is “an Article I tribunal” that Congress
placed within “a unique administrative scheme.” Id., at
437–438. Such tribunals often develop “special `expertise' ”
that guides them “ `in making complex determinations in a
specialized area of the law.' ” Sanders, 556 U. S., at 412.
And that is particularly true of the Veterans Court, which
Page Proof Pending Publication
regularly reviews “case-specifc raw material” in veterans'
cases. Ibid. This feature distinguishes the Veterans Court
from Article III appellate courts because it gives that court
the “experience” and “expertise,” Anderson, 470 U. S., at
574, that “enable it to make empirically based” judgments on
fact-specifc issues, Sanders, 556 U. S., at 412—such as
whether the beneft-of-the-doubt rule applies.
   Considering these unique features of the Veterans Court
and the legal landscape in which it operates, there is good
reason to believe that the Veterans Court is actually “better
suited to resolve” the approximate-balance inquiry than the
VA itself. U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 395. This is especially
so given the need for fairness and consistency in the applica-
tion of the “approximate balance” standard.
   Thus, even though review of the VA's approximate-balance
determination requires applying a legal standard to a set of
facts, the Veterans Court is well equipped to do so, and
de novo review of the VA's determination best promotes the
“sound administration of justice.” Miller, 474 U. S., at 114.
406                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

In concluding otherwise, the majority minimizes the “singu-
lar characteristics” of the review scheme at issue, Hender-
son, 562 U. S., at 440, and disregards Congress's choice to
task the Veterans Court with ensuring that the VA complies
with the beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
   Finally, because § 7261(a) unquestionably authorizes
de novo review of questions of law, the majority contends
that applying de novo review to the VA's approximate-balance
determinations would render subsection (b)(1) superfuous.
Ante, at 386. But that reasoning assumes that it was always
clear that an approximate-balance challenge raises a legal
question (an assumption belied by the very holding that the
majority announces today). Quite to the contrary, before
Congress enacted subsection (b)(1) to require that the Veter-
ans Court “take due account” of the VA's beneft-of-the-doubt
determinations, that court—erroneously, in my view—re-
viewed beneft-of-the-doubt challenges with deference. See
supra, at 390–391, 396–397. Properly understood, subsection
Page Proof Pending Publication
(b)(1) accomplishes the clear and important mission of abro-
gating the Federal Circuit and Veterans Court cases requir-
ing such deference. The majority simply ignores this point.
See ante, at 387.
                         *    *     *
   In response to complaints that the Veterans Court was not
doing enough to ensure that the VA was, in fact, giving
the beneft of the doubt to veterans, Congress inserted
into a demonstrably pro-claimant administrative scheme the
requirement that the Veterans Court “take due account”
of the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
§ 7261(b)(1). The reading that the majority adopts today re-
duces that provision to a rhetorical fourish and all but en-
sures that the Veterans Court will continue rubberstamping
the VA's application of the beneft-of-the-doubt rule.
   If the majority's holding is correct, then “Congress went
through an awful lot to achieve relatively little.” Wilkinson
v. Garland, 601 U. S. 209, 227 (2024) (Jackson, J., concurring
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. 369 (2025)            407

                     Jackson, J., dissenting

in judgment). The far better reading of this statute—one
that fully comports with the text, structure, context, history,
and purpose of the provision Congress wrote—is that the
Veterans Court must review without deference the VA's
approximate-balance determination, and thereby fully assess
that agency's compliance with Congress's commands.




Page Proof Pending Publication
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
Page Proof Pending Publication
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

p. 369: “Together with Thornton v. Collins, Secretary of Veterans Affairs
   (see this Court's Rule 12.4), also on certiorari to the same court” is
   inserted as a footnote to “Decided March 5, 2025”
p. 378, line 10 from bottom: “Bufkin v. McDonough” is inserted before 75
   F. 4th 1368”
p. 378, line 9 from bottom: “Thornton v. McDonough” is inserted before
   2023 WL 5091653”
p. 395, line 7 from bottom: “interpretation” is changed to “construction”