PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 606 U. S. Part 2
                             Pages 656–747




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 27, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
656                     OCTOBER TERM, 2024

                                 Syllabus


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION et al.
      v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH et al.
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                  the fth circuit
      No. 24–354. Argued March 26, 2025—Decided June 27, 2025*
The Communications Act of 1934 established the Federal Communications
  Commission (FCC or Commission) and instructed it to make available
  to “all the people of the United States” reliable communications services
  “at reasonable charges.” 47 U. S. C. § 151. That objective is today
  known as “universal service.” The universal-service project arose from
  the concern that pure market mechanisms would leave some population
  segments—such as the poor and those in rural areas—without access to
  needed communications services. Under the 1934 Act, the FCC pur-
  sued universal service primarily through implicit subsidies, using its
  rate-regulation authority to lower costs for some consumers at the ex-
  pense of others.
     In 1996, Congress amended the Act and created a new framework for

Page Proof Pending Publication
  achieving universal service. Section 254 of the amended statute re-
  quires every carrier providing interstate telecommunications services
  to “contribute” to a fund, known as the Universal Service Fund. See
  § 254(d). The FCC must use the money in the Fund to pay for
  universal-service subsidy programs. See §§ 254(a), (d), (e). The stat-
  ute designates the benefciaries of universal-service subsidies—low-
  income consumers, those in rural areas, schools and libraries, and rural
  hospitals. §§ 254(b)(3), (h)(1), ( j). And it provides detailed guidance
  regarding the communications services to which those benefciaries
  should have access. In deciding what services to subsidize, the FCC
  “shall consider the extent to which” a service is “essential to education,
  public health, or public safety” and has “been subscribed to by a sub-
  stantial majority of residential customers.” §§ 254(c)(1)(A)–(B). So
  too, the Commission must evaluate whether a service can be made avail-
  able at an “affordable rate[ ].” § 254(b)(1). Section 254 also sets forth
  “principles” on which the FCC “shall base” its universal-service policies.
  § 254(b). Among other things, those principles direct that all consum-
  ers, “including low-income consumers” and those in “rural” areas, should

  *Together with No. 24–422, Schools, Health, & Libraries Broadband
Coalition et al. v. Consumers' Research et al., also on certiorari to the
same court.
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                     657

                                  Syllabus

  have access to quality services at affordable prices. See ibid. The
  FCC also may add “other principles” found both “consistent with” the
  Act and “necessary and appropriate for the protection of the public in-
  terest, convenience, and necessity.” § 254(b)(7).
     To calculate how much carriers must contribute to the Fund, the FCC
  has devised a formula, known as the “contribution factor.” 47 CFR
  § 54.709(a). That factor is a fraction, expressed as a percentage, whose
  numerator is the Fund's projected quarterly expenses (the subsidy pay-
  ments it will make plus overhead) and whose denominator is contribut-
  ing carriers' total projected quarterly revenue. § 54.709(a)(2). A car-
  rier must pay into the Fund an amount equal to its own projected
  revenue multiplied by the contribution factor. § 54.709(a)(3).
     The FCC has appointed the Universal Service Administrative Com-
  pany, a private, not-for-proft corporation, as the Fund's “permanent
  Administrator.” § 54.701(a). The Administrator manages the Fund's
  day-to-day operations and also plays a role in producing the fnancial
  projections that end up determining the contribution factor. See
  §§ 54.702, 54.709(a)(2)–(3). Each quarter, the Administrator projects
  the Fund's expenses, adds up revenue estimates it receives from carri-
  ers, and submits those fgures to the Commission for approval and even-

Page Proof Pending Publication
  tual use in calculating the contribution factor. See §§ 54.709(a)(2)–(3).
     In December 2021, the FCC set a 25.2% contribution factor for the
  frst quarter of 2022. Consumers' Research petitioned for review in the
  Fifth Circuit, contending that the universal-service contribution scheme
  violates the nondelegation doctrine. The en banc court granted the pe-
  tition, replacing a panel decision to the contrary. See 109 F. 4th 743; 63
  F. 4th 441. In the full Fifth Circuit's view, the combination of Con-
  gress's delegation to the FCC and the FCC's “subdelegation” to the
  Administrator violated the Constitution, even if neither delegation did
  so independently. 109 F. 4th, at 778.
Held: The universal-service contribution scheme does not violate the non-
 delegation doctrine. Pp. 672–698.
    (a) Article I of the Constitution provides that “[a]ll legislative Powers
 herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States.” § 1.
 Accompanying that assignment of power to Congress is a bar on its
 further delegation. At the same time, this Court has recognized that
 Congress may “seek[ ] assistance” from its coordinate branches and
 “vest[ ] discretion” in executive agencies to implement the laws it has
 enacted. J. W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U. S. 394, 406.
 To distinguish between the permissible and the impermissible in this
 sphere, this Court asks whether Congress has set out an “intelligible
 principle” to guide what it has given the agency to do. Id., at 409.
658              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                                Syllabus

 Under that test, Congress must make clear both “the general policy” the
 agency must pursue and “the boundaries of [its] delegated authority.”
 American Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U. S. 90, 105. Pp. 672–673.
    (b) Although the intelligible-principle standard has long guided this
 Court's nondelegation doctrine, Consumers' Research insists that a dif-
 ferent test applies here. According to Consumers' Research, universal-
 service contributions are taxes. And tax statutes, Consumers' Re-
 search argues, must satisfy a special nondelegation rule. For those
 statutes, Congress must set a defnite or objective limit on how much
 money an agency can collect—a numeric cap, a fxed tax rate, or the
 equivalent. Section 254 contains no such limit, so, in Consumers' Re-
 search's view, it is unconstitutional.
    The Court rejects that argument. To begin with, precedent fore-
 closes it: In both J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409, and Skinner v. Mid-
 America Pipeline Co., 490 U. S. 212, 220–221, the Court declined
 requests to create a special nondelegation rule for revenue-raising legis-
 lation. The test Consumers' Research proposes also would throw a
 host of federal statutes into doubt, as Congress has often empowered
 agencies to raise revenue without specifying a numeric cap or tax rate.
 See, e. g., 12 U. S. C. §§ 16, 243, 1815(d)(1). Consumers' Research re-

Page Proof Pending Publication
 sponds that those other statutes can be distinguished as imposing fees,
 rather than taxes, and thus be exempted from its numeric-limit require-
 ment. But Skinner made clear that whether a charge is a tax or a fee
 is irrelevant to the nondelegation inquiry. See 490 U. S., at 223. Fi-
 nally, the Consumers' Research position produces absurd results, di-
 vorced from any reasonable understanding of constitutional values.
 Under its view, a revenue-raising statute containing non-numeric, quali-
 tative standards can never pass muster, no matter how tight the con-
 straints they impose. But a revenue-raising statute with a numeric
 limit will always pass muster, even if it effectively leaves an agency
 with boundless power. In precluding the former and approving the lat-
 ter, the Consumers' Research approach does nothing to vindicate the
 nondelegation doctrine or the separation of powers. Pp. 673–680.
    (c) Under the usual intelligible-principle test, the universal-service
 contribution scheme clears the nondelegation bar. Section 254 directs
 the FCC to collect contributions that are “sufficient” to support
 universal-service programs. §§ 254(b)(5), (d), (e). The word “suffi-
 cient” sets both a foor and a ceiling—the FCC cannot raise less than
 what is adequate or necessary to fnance its universal-service programs,
 but it also cannot raise more than that amount. And the “suffciency”
 ceiling imposes a meaningful limit on the Commission, because Section
 254 also provides appropriate guidance about the nature and content of
 universal service. The statute makes clear whom the program is in-
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    659

                                Syllabus

 tended to serve: those in rural and other high-cost areas (with a special
 nod to rural hospitals), low-income consumers, and schools and libraries.
 See §§ 254(b)(3), (6), (h)(1). And it also defnes the services those bene-
 fciaries should receive. In order for the FCC to subsidize a service, the
 service must be subscribed to by a substantial majority of residential
 customers, available at affordable rates, and essential to education, pub-
 lic health, or safety. §§ 254(b)(1), (3), (c)(1)(A)–(B). Those conditions,
 each alone and together, provide the FCC with determinate standards
 for operating the universal-service program.
    Consumers' Research contends that the Act gives the FCC boundless
 authority, but the provisions it points to show nothing of the kind. It
 frst argues that the Commission need not actually adhere to each of the
 criteria Section 254 uses to defne universal service. Properly under-
 stood, however, those criteria are separately mandatory. Next, Con-
 sumers' Research highlights Section 254(c)(1)'s description of universal
 service as an “evolving level of telecommunications services that the
 Commission shall establish periodically” in light of advances in technol-
 ogy. That provision, it says, enables the FCC to redefne universal
 service as it sees ft. But the permission Congress gave the FCC to
 fund different services over time does not strip the statute of standards

Page Proof Pending Publication
 and constraints. The Commission still may fund only essential, widely
 used, and affordable services, for the beneft of only designated recipi-
 ents. Finally, Consumers' Research maintains that the statutory provi-
 sion enabling the FCC to articulate “[a]dditional principles” to guide its
 universal-service policies allows the agency to rewrite its own authority.
 § 254(b)(7). But that is not so, because Section 254(b)(7) requires the
 added principles to be “consistent with” the rest of the statute. So they
 cannot change the statute's other principles, much less its conditions on
 what subsidies can go toward and who can receive them. Pp. 680–691.
    (d) Consumers' Research separately claims that the FCC has imper-
 missibly delegated authority to the Administrator to set the contribution
 factor. In making this argument, Consumers' Research invokes what
 is commonly called the private nondelegation doctrine. In Carter v.
 Carter Coal Co., 298 U. S. 238, 311, this Court struck down a statute
 authorizing certain coal producers to set rules for the rest of the indus-
 try, fnding the delegation improper because it was made to “private
 persons whose interests” are often “adverse to the interests of others.”
 But a counterpart case, Sunshine Anthracite Coal Co. v. Adkins, 310
 U. S. 381, 388, approved a statute permitting private actors to make
 recommendations to a Government agency for “approv[al], disapprov[al],
 or modif[cation].” That arrangement was valid, because the private
 parties “function[ed] subordinately to” the agency and were subject to
 its “authority and surveillance.” Id., at 399.
660               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                                 Syllabus

     Under those precedents, the Commission's use of the Administrator
  is permissible. The Administrator is broadly subordinate to the Com-
  mission: The Commission appoints the Administrator's Board of Direc-
  tors, approves its budget, and requires the Administrator to act “consist-
  ent with” its rules and directives. 47 CFR §§ 54.703(b)–(c), 54.715(c);
  Memorandum of Understanding Between the Federal Communications
  Commission and the Universal Service Administrative Company 2 (Oct.
  17, 2024). And the Commission's authority and oversight over the Ad-
  ministrator extend to determining the contribution factor. Working
  within FCC rules, the Administrator produces the initial projections of
  carrier revenues and Fund expenses that feed into the contribution fac-
  tor. §§ 54.709(a)(2)–(3). The Administrator then reports its fgures to
  the Commission, which reviews—and if needed, revises—the projections
  before approving them and publishing the contribution factor. See
  § 54.709(a)(3). The Commission then has 14 days to make additional
  changes before the factor is “deemed approved by the Commission.”
  Ibid. So although the Administrator makes recommendations, the
  Commission is, throughout, the fnal authority. Pp. 692–695.
     (e) The Court also rejects the basis of the decision below: that the
  “combination” of Congress's grant of authority to the FCC and the

Page Proof Pending Publication
  FCC's reliance on the Administrator violates the Constitution, even if
  neither one does so alone. 109 F. 4th, at 778 (emphasis in original).
  The Fifth Circuit founded that theory on Free Enterprise Fund v. Pub-
  lic Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. 477, 483–484, where
  this Court struck down a statute because it gave an executive offcer
  two “layers of protection” from the President's removal authority.
  Even granting that each layer of protection was alone permissible, the
  Court thought the combination was too much. According to the Fifth
  Circuit, similar reasoning applied here: Even if Congress lawfully con-
  ferred discretion on the Commission and the Commission lawfully
  sought assistance from the Administrator, the combination was imper-
  missible. 109 F. 4th, at 778. But the court's logic does not work. In
  Free Enterprise Fund, the two layers of for-cause protection operated
  on a single axis, with the one exacerbating the other. That is not the
  case here: A law violates the traditional nondelegation doctrine when
  it authorizes an agency to legislate. And a law violates the private
  nondelegation doctrine when it allows non-governmental entities to gov-
  ern. Those doctrines do not operate on the same axis. So a measure
  implicating (but not violating) one does not compound a measure impli-
  cating (but not violating) the other, in a way that pushes the combina-
  tion over a constitutional line. Pp. 696–698.
109 F. 4th 743, reversed and remanded.
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   661

                                Syllabus

  Kagan, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Roberts, C. J.,
and Sotomayor, Kavanaugh, Barrett, and Jackson, JJ., joined. Ka-
vanaugh, J., post, p. 698, and Jackson, J., post, p. 710, fled concurring
opinions. Gorsuch, J., fled a dissenting opinion, in which Thomas and
Alito, JJ., joined, post, p. 711.

   Acting Solicitor General Harris argued the cause for peti-
tioners in No. 24–354. On the briefs were former Solicitor
General Prelogar, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney
General Boynton, Deputy Solicitor General Stewart, Vivek
Suri, Mark B. Stern, Gerard J. Sinzdak, Jacob M. Lewis, and
James M. Carr.
   Paul D. Clement argued the cause for petitioners in No.
24–422. With him on the briefs for petitioner Competitive
Carriers Association et al. in both cases were C. Harker
Rhodes IV, Kevin Wynosky, and Jennifer Tatel. Christo-
pher J. Wright fled briefs for petitioner SHLB Coalition
et al. in both cases. With him on the brief were Sean A.

Page Proof Pending Publication
Lev, Jason Neal, Mohammad M. Ali, and Andrew Jay
Schwartzman.
   R. Trent McCotter argued the cause for respondents in
both cases. With him on the briefs were Jonathan Berry,
Michael Buschbacher, Jared M. Kelson, James R. Conde,
Robert Henneke, and Chance Weldon.†
   †Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal in both cases were fled for the
State of Alaska by Treg Taylor, Attorney General of Alaska, and Laura
Wolff, Assistant Attorney General; for the State of Colorado et al. by
Philip J. Weiser, Attorney General of Colorado, Shannon Stevenson, Solic-
itor General, Russell D. Johnson, Deputy Solicitor General, Judson Cary
and Michel Singer Nelson, Senior Assistant Attorneys General, and
Dayna Zolle Hauser, Assistant Solicitor General, and by the Attorneys
General for their respective jurisdictions as follows: Kris Mayes of Ari-
zona, William Tong of Connecticut, Kathleen Jennings of Delaware,
Brian L. Schwalb of the District of Columbia, Anne E. Lopez of Hawaii,
Kwame Raoul of Illinois, Aaron M. Frey of Maine, Anthony G. Brown of
Maryland, Andrea Joy Campbell of Massachusetts, Dana Nessel of Michi-
gan, Keith Ellison of Minnesota, Aaron D. Ford of Nevada, Matthew J.
Platkin of New Jersey, Letitia A. James of New York, Jeff Jackson of
North Carolina, Michelle A. Henry of Pennsylvania, Peter F. Neronha of
662              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Opinion of the Court

  Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the Court.
  Nearly a century ago, Congress charged the then-new Fed-
eral Communications Commission (FCC or Commission)

Rhode Island, Marty Jackley of South Dakota, Charity R. Clark of Ver-
mont, Josh Kaul of Wisconsin, and Bridget Hill of Wyoming; for AASA—
The School Superintendents Association et al. by Ari Holtzblatt; for the
American Library Association by Bryan Killian and Kimberly L. Morn-
ing; for Bipartisan Former Commissioners of the Federal Communications
Commission by Peter Karanjia; for CoBank, ACB, et al. by Andrew D.
Lipman and Russell M. Blau; for Former Leadership of the Universal
Service Administrative Co. by Gina Spade and Jennifer McKee; for the
Local Government Legal Center et al. by Tillman L. Lay, Gregory M.
Caffas, and Amanda Karras; for Members of Congress by Kevin F. King;
for the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners by
James Braford Ramsay; for the National Lifeline Association et al. by
Miles E. Coleman, John J. Heitmann, Christian J. Myers, William A.
Rivera, Louis Lopez, and David S. Yellin; for the Oglala Sioux Tribe by
Mario Gonzalez and Majel Russell; for Public Citizen by Nicolas A. San-

Page Proof Pending Publication
sone, Allison M. Zieve, and Scott L. Nelson; for Public Knowledge et al.
by John Bergmayer, Greg Guice, and Matthew Holder; for State-Level
Associations by Edward A. Yorkgitis, Jr., and Ira T. Kasdan; for WTA—
Advocates for Rural Broadband by Michael F. Smith; and for Julian Davis
Mortenson et al. by Elizabeth B. Wydra, Brianne J. Gorod, and Brian R.
Frazelle. Jeffrey B. Wall, Morgan L. Ratner, and Christopher J. Walker
fled a brief in both cases for the Chamber of Commerce of the United
States of America urging vacatur.
  Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal in No. 24–354 were fled for the
National Foreign Trade Council by Alan B. Morrison; for NCTA—The
Internet & Television Association et al. by Samuel L. Feder, Matthew S.
Hellman, Rick C. Chessen, Russell P. Hanser, and Eve L. Hill; and for
Gerard N. Magliocca et al. by Gerard N. Magliocca, pro se.
  Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance in both cases were fled for the
State of West Virginia et al. by John B. McCuskey, Attorney General of
West Virginia, Michael R. Williams, Solicitor General, Rusty D. Crandell,
and Linley Wilson, and by the Attorneys General for their respective
States as follows: Steve Marshall of Alabama, Tim Griffn of Arkansas,
James Uthmeier of Florida, Theodore E. Rokita of Indiana, Kris Kobach
of Kansas, Liz Murrill of Louisiana, Andrew Bailey of Missouri, Austin
Knudsen of Montana, Dave Yost of Ohio, Gentner Drummond of Okla-
homa, Alan Wilson of South Carolina, Jonathan Skrmetti of Tennessee,
Ken Paxton of Texas, and Jason Miyares of Virginia; for the Alliance
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    663

                           Opinion of the Court

with making communications services available, at affordable
prices, to all Americans. That objective became known as
“universal service.” Some decades on, near the turn of the
21st century, Congress reaffrmed its commitment to univer-
sal service while providing new and more detailed instruc-
tions to the FCC about how to achieve it. Under the
amended statutory plan, the FCC would use required pay-
ments, called contributions, from telecommunications compa-
nies to subsidize basic communications services for consum-
ers in certain underserved communities—particularly, rural

Defending Freedom by Jacob P. Warner, James A. Campbell, and John J.
Bursch; for Americans for Prosperity Foundation by Michael Pepson; for
the Cato Institute et al. by Thomas Berry, Brent Skorup, Charles M.
Brandt, and Ilya Shapiro; for the Firearms Policy Coalition, Inc., et al. by
David H. Thompson and Peter A. Patterson; for the Immigration Reform
Law Institute by Christopher J. Hajec; for the National Federation of
Independent Business Small Business Legal Center, Inc., et al. by Jay C.

Page Proof Pending Publication
Johnson and Craig Gilley; for the National Taxpayers Union Foundation
by Tyler Martinez; for the Southeastern Legal Foundation by Braden H.
Boucek and Celia Howard O'Leary; and for TechFreedom by Corbin K.
Barthold.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance in No. 24–354 were fled for
The Buckeye Institute by David C. Tryon and Alex M. Certo; for the
Foundation for Government Accountability by David J. Craig; for the Pa-
cifc Legal Foundation by Luke A. Wake and Frank D. Garrison; and for
Chad Squitieri by Andrew S. Tulumello.
   Briefs of amici curiae were fled in both cases for the Ad Hoc Health-
care Group by James U. Troup and Jeffrey A. Mitchell; for Advancing
American Freedom et al. by J. Marc Wheat; for the Aleutian Pribilof Is-
lands Association, Inc., et al. by Geoffrey D. Strommer and Caroline
P. Mayhew; for the America First Legal Foundation by Christopher E.
Mills and Reed D. Rubinstein; for America's Future et al. by William
J. Olson, Jeremiah L. Morgan, and Michael Boos; for the Competitive
Enterprise Institute by Devin Watkins; for the Lawyers' Committee for
Civil Rights Under Law et al. by Damon Hewitt, Dariely Rodriguez, Gil-
lian Cassell-Stiga, and Marc Epstein; for the Mackinac Center for Public
Policy et al. by Alex T. MacDonald; for the New Civil Liberties Alliance
by Zhonette M. Brown and Markham S. Chenoweth; for the Reason Foun-
dation by Alexander Volokh; for Reed Smith LLP by Kyle O. Sollie; and
for Ilan Wurman, pro se.
664            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

and low-income areas. To carry out that mandate, the Com-
mission established discrete subsidy programs for the con-
sumers Congress had identifed, set up a special fund to re-
ceive and disburse the companies' payments, and enlisted a
private corporation, called the Universal Service Adminis-
trative Company, to help manage that fund's operations.
   The question in this case is whether the universal-service
scheme—more particularly, its contribution mechanism—vi-
olates the Constitution's nondelegation doctrine, either be-
cause Congress has given away its power to the FCC or
because the FCC has given away its power to a private com-
pany. We hold that no impermissible transfer of authority
has occurred. Under our nondelegation precedents, Con-
gress suffciently guided and constrained the discretion that
it lodged with the FCC to implement the universal-service
contribution scheme. And the FCC, in its turn, has retained
all decision-making authority within that sphere, relying on

Page Proof Pending Publication
the Administrative Company only for non-binding advice.
Nothing in those arrangements, either separately or to-
gether, violates the Constitution.

                               I
                              A
   The Communications Act of 1934, ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064,
established the FCC and empowered it to regulate communi-
cations services. In the Act's very frst provision, Congress
instructed the FCC to pursue the goal now called universal
service. The FCC, Congress stated, was “to make available,
so far as possible, to all the people of the United States,”
reliable communications services “at reasonable charges.”
47 U. S. C. § 151.
   The universal-service project arose from the concern that
pure market mechanisms would leave some segments of the
population without access to needed communications serv-
ices. That is because providers of those services, also called
carriers, can reap greater profts from some classes of cus-
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            665

                      Opinion of the Court

tomers than from others. Carriers, for example, make more
money in urban areas than in rural ones because fxed costs
in cities are spreadable over many more users. See S. Ben-
jamin et al., Telecommunications Law and Policy § 15.3.1,
p. 763 (2d ed. 2006); In re Federal-State Joint Bd. on Univer-
sal Serv., 12 FCC Rcd. 8776, 8784 (1997) (Universal Service
Order). Similarly, carriers may prefer to focus on business
customers instead of residential or not-for-proft customers
(like schools and libraries) because the former are willing to
pay more for the same services. See id., at 8784. So carri-
ers have incentives to neglect some kinds of customers in
providing services or setting prices. See P. Huber, M. Kel-
logg, & J. Thorne, Federal Telecommunications Law § 6.1.2,
pp. 6–9, 6–10, and n. 26 (3d ed. Supp. 2022). The result, poli-
cymakers thought, would be severe inequities in access to
communications systems, and a swiss-cheese-like communi-
cations network for the whole country. See ibid.; Universal
Page Proof Pending Publication
Service Order, 12 FCC Rcd., at 8780–8781, 8783.
   Under the original Act, the FCC addressed that concern—
and promoted universal service—through a “patchwork quilt
of implicit and explicit subsidies.” FCC, Report to Con-
gress 5 (FCC 98–67, 1998). The earliest and dominant
squares of that quilt were implicit subsidies, provided under
the FCC's authority to set “just and reasonable” rates. See
Universal Service Order, 12 FCC Rcd., at 8784; 47 U. S. C.
§ 201(b). Carriers then operated as regulated monopolies,
with the FCC (and its state counterparts) superintending
the rates they could charge different kinds of customers for
different services. See Universal Service Order, 12 FCC
Rcd., at 8784–8785; Huber, Federal Telecommunications Law
§ 6.1.1.2, p. 6–7. And regulators used that authority over
rates to shift costs: Long-distance rates were set enough
above cost “to subsidize local rates, business rates to subsi-
dize [non-business] rates, and urban rates to subsidize rural
rates.” Id., p. 6–7. So, for example, a “large New York
[City] brokerage frm making heavy use of long-distance
666            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

service” would end up “subsidiz[ing] the local services of
homeowners in Fishkill.” Ibid.; see Universal Service
Order, 12 FCC Rcd., at 8784. Over time, though, towns like
Fishkill benefted as well from explicit subsidy programs.
The FCC, for example, began in the 1980s to levy assess-
ments on long-distance carriers and disburse the proceeds to
carriers serving high-cost communities. See id., at 8890–
8892; 47 CFR §§ 36.601–36.641, 69.116(a) (1996). And the
FCC began, through the so-called Lifeline program, to make
payments directly reducing low-income consumers' monthly
phone bills. See Universal Service Order, 12 FCC Rcd., at
8957–8958; §§ 69.104( j)–(l), 69.117, 69.203(f)–(g).
   In 1996, Congress overhauled the Act to “promote compe-
tition and reduce regulation” in the telecommunications sec-
tor. See Telecommunications Act, 110 Stat. 56. As part of
those reforms, Congress created a new framework for
achieving universal service. The amended Act discarded
Page Proof Pending Publication
the implicit subsidies embedded in ratemaking and substi-
tuted a plan for explicit transfer payments to ensure that
basic communications services extend across the country.
See § 254; Universal Service Order, 12 FCC Rcd., at 8783–
8784.
   Section 254 of the amended statute requires every carrier
providing interstate telecommunications services to “con-
tribute,” in line with the statute and FCC rules, to a fund
designed to “preserve and advance universal service.”
§ 254(d). The FCC must use the money in that fund, now
known as the Universal Service Fund, to pay for subsidy
programs for designated populations and facilities needing
improved access. See §§ 254(a), (e); Wisconsin Bell, Inc. v.
United States ex rel. Heath, 604 U. S. 140, 143–144 (2025).
The statute, for example, continues the Lifeline program aid-
ing low-income individuals. See § 254( j). It directs the FCC
to provide assistance to rural hospitals, as well as to schools
and libraries. See § 254(h)(1). And it instructs the FCC to
expand communications access for consumers in “rural” and
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             667

                      Opinion of the Court

other “high cost areas.” § 254(b)(3). The carrier contribu-
tions collected to support those programs, the Act further
provides, must be “suffcient” to carry them out and so to
“advance universal service.” §§ 254(d)–(e).
   The statute also provides detailed guidance for identifying
the specifc communications services to which the statute's
benefciaries should have access. On the one hand, the Act
recognizes that those services, given the expected pace of
technological change, are unlikely to stay static: Universal
service, says the statute, is “an evolving level of telecommu-
nications services that the Commission shall establish peri-
odically” as it accounts for “advances in telecommunications
and information technologies and services.” § 254(c)(1).
On the other hand, the Act specifes the relevant criteria in
every period. In deciding which communications services
the “defnition” of universal service encompasses, the FCC
“shall consider the extent to which” a service (1) is “essential
Page Proof Pending Publication
to education, public health, or public safety”; (2) has, through
market forces, “been subscribed to by a substantial majority
of residential customers”; and (3) is in fact “being deployed in
public telecommunications networks by telecommunications
carriers.” §§ 254(c)(1)(A)–(C). So too, the Commission
must evaluate whether a service can be made available at
an “affordable rate[ ].” § 254(b)(1). Congress thus struck a
balance in establishing universal service's metes and
bounds—affording the FCC latitude to adapt to technological
developments, but insisting that the FCC always look to
whether services are essential, affordable, and widely used.
   Echoing the provisions just described, Congress also listed
six “principles” on which the FCC “shall base” all its
universal-service policies. § 254(b). First, “[q]uality serv-
ices should be available at just, reasonable, and affordable
rates.” § 254(b)(1). Second, “all regions of the Nation”
should have access to those services. § 254(b)(2). Third, all
consumers, “including low-income consumers and those in
rural, insular, and high cost areas,” should have access to
668            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                       Opinion of the Court

services that are “reasonably comparable” in quality and
price to those in urban areas. § 254(b)(3). Fourth, every
carrier should make “an equitable and nondiscriminatory
contribution” to the achievement of universal service.
§ 254(b)(4). Fifth, the subsidies given to advance that goal
should be “specific, predictable[,] and sufficient. ”
§ 254(b)(5). And sixth, “schools,” “libraries,” and “health
care providers” should have access to services. § 254(b)(6).
That list concludes with a provision enabling the FCC to add
“other principles” found both “consistent with” the Act and
“necessary and appropriate for the protection of the public
interest, convenience, and necessity.” § 254(b)(7).
   The Commission now operates, under the terms of the Act,
four universal-service programs. Lifeline, which predated
the Act, gives low-income consumers a markdown on their
monthly phone bills, usually of $9.25 per month. See
§ 254( j); 47 CFR §§ 54.400–54.424 (2024); supra, at 666. The
Page Proof Pending Publication
High Cost program, which similarly built on a pre-1996 ex-
plicit subsidy program, furnishes carriers with funds en-
abling them to provide basic communications services in
“rural, insular, and [other] high cost areas” at costs compara-
ble to those charged in urban areas. § 254(b)(3); §§ 54.302–
54.322; supra, at 666. The E-Rate program subsidizes com-
munications services for schools and libraries across the
country, with greater discounts going to facilities in rural or
low-income areas. See §§ 254(b)(6), (h)(1)(B); §§ 54.500–
54.523; Wisconsin Bell, 604 U. S., at 144. And fnally, the
Rural Health program supports rural hospitals and other
health care facilities, enabling them to use telemedicine in car-
ing for far-fung patients and ensuring that they receive the
needed communications services at roughly the rates urban
facilities pay. See §§ 254(b)(6), (h)(1)(A); §§ 54.600–54.633.
   To calculate how much carriers must contribute to the
Fund for those programs, the FCC has devised a formula,
known as the “contribution factor.” 47 CFR § 54.709(a).
That factor is a fraction, expressed as a percentage, whose
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             669

                      Opinion of the Court

numerator is the Fund's projected expenses for the upcoming
quarter (the subsidy payments it will make plus overhead)
and whose denominator is the total projected revenue of
contributing carriers during that same period. See
§ 54.709(a)(2). A carrier must pay into the Fund an amount
equal to its own projected revenue multiplied by the contri-
bution factor. See § 54.709(a)(3). So, for example, if the
FCC forecasts that it will need, in a given quarter, 25% of
all carrier revenues to cover the costs of its universal-service
programs, a carrier expecting to generate $100 million in
revenue in that quarter will have to contribute $25 million.
The carrier may then pass along to its customers the cost of
its contributions. See § 54.712(a). Every quarter, the FCC
updates its expense and revenue projections, comes up with
a new contribution factor, and announces it in a public notice.
See §§ 54.709(a)(2)–(3). During the next 14 days, the FCC
may revise the factor as it thinks proper. See § 54.709(a)(3).
Page Proof Pending Publication
If the FCC takes no action within that period, the factor is
“deemed approved by the Commission” and goes into effect.
Ibid. Carriers must then kick in to the Fund accordingly.
   The FCC in 1998 appointed the Universal Service Admin-
istrative Company as the Fund's “permanent Administra-
tor.” § 54.701(a). The Administrator, as we will call it, is a
private, not-for-proft corporation owned by an association of
carriers. See § 54.5; Wisconsin Bell, 604 U. S., at 144. It
manages the day-to-day operations of the Fund, “bill[ing]
and collect[ing] contributions from carriers” and “distribut-
[ing] the resulting pot of money, as FCC rules provide, to
program benefciaries.” Ibid.; see § 54.702. More relevant
here, the Administrator plays a role each quarter in produc-
ing the fnancial projections that end up determining
the contribution factor. See §§ 54.709(a)(2)–(3). Specifi-
cally, the Administrator estimates the Fund's expenses
(again, the costs of the programs plus overhead) and adds up
the estimates it receives from individual carriers about their
revenues. See ibid. The Administrator then submits those
670            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

fgures, along with supporting documentation, to the Com-
mission for approval and eventual use in calculating required
contributions. See ibid.
                             B
   In December 2021, the FCC proposed a contribution factor
of 25.2% for the frst quarter of 2022. Respondents—the
non-proft organization Consumers' Research, a carrier, and
several consumers (collectively, Consumers' Research)—fled
comments (during the 14-day, post-notice period described
above) requesting that the FCC instead set the contribution
factor at 0%. In support of that submission, Consumers'
Research argued that the universal-service contribution
scheme violates the Constitution's nondelegation rule. The
Commission took no action in response, so the 25.2% contri-
bution factor went into effect.
   Consumers' Research then petitioned for review in the
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. The en banc court
Page Proof Pending Publication
granted the petition, replacing a panel decision to the con-
trary. See 109 F. 4th 743 (2024); 63 F. 4th 441 (2023). In
the full Fifth Circuit's view, the universal-service contribu-
tion mechanism is unconstitutional because of its so-called
“double-layered delegation.” 109 F. 4th, at 782.
   The court's analysis proceeded by expressing “skepti-
c[ism]” about each of two aspects of the contribution scheme,
while declining to rule on either one. Id., at 778. First, the
court stated, Congress in Section 254 “may have delegated
legislative power” to the FCC by giving it “the power to
tax” carriers “without supplying an intelligible principle to
guide [its] discretion.” Id., at 756. The court described
Section 254's limits on the Commission's authority as “mini-
mal,” “contentless,” and “amorphous.” Id., at 760, 761, 767.
Nonetheless, the court decided not to decide whether Con-
gress had impermissibly transferred authority to the Com-
mission. Id., at 767. Second, the court continued, the Com-
mission “may have impermissibly delegated the taxing
power to private entities” by involving the Administrator in
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   671

                          Opinion of the Court

setting contribution amounts. Id., at 756. The court pos-
ited that the FCC had “de facto abdicate[d]” governmental
responsibilities to the Administrator by giving it the “fnal
say” on how much carriers pay into the Fund. Id., at 771.
Again, however, the court demurred as to the bottom line,
reserving judgment on whether the Administrator's role in
the contribution scheme violates the Constitution. See id.,
at 778.
   The dispositive constitutional problem, the Fifth Circuit
ultimately held, is “the combination of Congress's sweeping
delegation to FCC and FCC's unauthorized subdelegation”
to the Administrator. Ibid. (emphasis in original). Relying
heavily on this Court's decision in Free Enterprise Fund v.
Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. 477
(2010), the court opined that “two or more things that are
not independently unconstitutional can combine to violate
the Constitution's separation of powers.” 109 F. 4th, at 778

Page Proof Pending Publication
(emphasis in original). And that was true here for a pair
of reasons. The “double-layered delegation,” the court
thought, had “no foothold in history or tradition.” Id., at
782. And, the court went on, that delegation “undermine[s]
democratic accountability” by obscuring whether Congress,
the FCC, or the Administrator bears responsibility for the
amount of contributions. Id., at 783–784.
   We granted certiorari, 604 U. S. 1029 (2024), and now re-
verse the decision below.1 In this Court, Consumers' Re-

  1
    When we granted certiorari, we asked the parties to address whether
this case is moot. The parties agree that it is not moot, and we do too.
The relevant facts are as follows. Consumers' Research fled suit to avoid
payments arising from the contribution factor that the FCC set for the
frst quarter of 2022. But by now Consumers' Research has made those
payments, and a court might not be able to order a refund. Assuming
not, the case would be moot—except that it qualifes as “capable of repeti-
tion, yet evading review.” Kingdomware Technologies, Inc. v. United
States, 579 U. S. 162, 170 (2016). A given contribution factor is in effect
for only three months, a period “too short to complete judicial review of
[its] lawfulness.” Ibid. And “it is reasonable to expect” that Consumers'
672               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                           Opinion of the Court

search separates what the Fifth Circuit combined. It con-
tends (as it did below) that Congress's delegation to the FCC
violates the Constitution, and that the FCC's delegation to
the Administrator does so too. We reject each argument,
and also reject the Fifth Circuit's combination theory.

                                    II
   Article I of the Constitution provides that “[a]ll legislative
Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States.” § 1. Accompanying that assignment of
power to Congress is a bar on its further delegation: Legisla-
tive power, we have held, belongs to the legislative branch,
and to no other. See Whitman v. American Trucking
Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 472 (2001). At the same time, we
have recognized that Congress may “seek[ ] assistance” from
its coordinate branches to secure the “effect intended by its
acts of legislation.” J. W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United
Page Proof Pending Publication
States, 276 U. S. 394, 406 (1928). And in particular, Con-
gress may “vest[ ] discretion” in executive agencies to imple-
ment and apply the laws it has enacted—for example, by de-
ciding on “the details of [their] execution.” Ibid.; see
Wayman v. Southard, 10 Wheat. 1, 46 (1825) (“[T]he maker
of the law may commit something to the discretion of the
other departments”); Whitman, 531 U. S., at 474–475 (A “de-
gree of policy judgment” can “be left to those executing or
applying the law”).

Research will have to make the same kind of payments again. Ibid. So
the case, as the Fifth Circuit concluded, is not moot. See 109 F. 4th 743,
753 (2024). Several other courts of appeals would have arrived at the
opposite conclusion, because they require a party to seek preliminary re-
lief in order to avail itself of the capable-of-repetition rule. See, e. g.,
Newdow v. Roberts, 603 F. 3d 1002, 1008–1009 (CADC 2010), cert. denied,
563 U. S. 1001 (2011). But our decisions have never hinted at such a re-
quirement. See, e. g., Kingdomware Technologies, 579 U. S., at 170; SEC
v. Sloan, 436 U. S. 103, 108–110 (1978). And for good reason: The “capable
of repetition” rule applies because of the nature of some controversies, not
because of the parties' litigating decisions.
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            673

                      Opinion of the Court

   To distinguish between the permissible and the impermis-
sible in this sphere, we have long asked whether Congress
has set out an “intelligible principle” to guide what it has
given the agency to do. J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409.
Under that test, “the degree of agency discretion that is ac-
ceptable varies according to the scope of the power congres-
sionally conferred.” Whitman, 531 U. S., at 475. The
“guidance” needed is greater, we have explained, when an
agency action will “affect the entire national economy” than
when it addresses a narrow, technical issue (e. g., the defni-
tion of “country [grain] elevators”). Ibid. But in examin-
ing a statute for the requisite intelligible principle, we have
generally assessed whether Congress has made clear both
“the general policy” that the agency must pursue and “the
boundaries of [its] delegated authority. ” Amer ican
Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U. S. 90, 105 (1946). And
similarly, we have asked if Congress has provided suffcient

Page Proof Pending Publication
standards to enable both “the courts and the public [to] as-
certain whether the agency” has followed the law. OPP
Cotton Mills, Inc. v. Administrator of Wage and Hour Div.,
Dept. of Labor, 312 U. S. 126, 144 (1941). If Congress has
done so—as we have almost always found—then we will not
disturb its grant of authority.

                                A
   Although the intelligible-principle standard has focused
our nondelegation doctrine for a century, Consumers' Re-
search and the dissent primarily argue that we must apply
a different test here. Section 254, as just described, author-
izes the Commission to raise revenue in the form of carrier
“contribut[ions]” for universal-service programs. § 254(d);
see supra, at 666. Consumers' Research views those re-
quired contributions as taxes. See Brief for Respondents 25–
29; see also post, at 722, 738–739 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting).
And it argues that tax statutes—and probably all revenue-
raising statutes—have to satisfy a special nondelegation rule.
674               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Opinion of the Court

For those statutes, Congress must set a “defnite” or “objec-
tive limit” on how much money an agency can collect—a nu-
meric cap, a fxed rate, or the equivalent. Brief for Re-
spondents 32, 36; see id., at 33–35; see also post, at 723–725
(stating that a “tax rate” is likely required, but a “cap” may
also suffce). Without such a limit, Consumers' Research
claims, no intelligible principle (however constraining) will
do. See Brief for Respondents 46, 66. And all agree that
Section 254 contains no determinate cap or formula. So, on
Consumers' Research's telling, it effects an unconstitutional
delegation.2
   But this Court's precedents foreclose that argument.
Twice before, we have rejected a party's request to create a
special nondelegation rule for revenue-raising legislation.
In J. W. Hampton, a taxpayer contended that when Congress
is “exercis[ing] the power to levy taxes and fx customs du-
ties,” it lacks the usual leeway to confer discretion on agen-

Page Proof Pending Publication
cies. 276 U. S., at 409. “The [legal] authorities,” the Court
responded, “make no such distinction.” Ibid. And then the
Court set out the “intelligible principle” standard as the uni-
versal method for assessing delegations. Ibid. More than
sixty years later, we reiterated that holding. In Skinner v.
Mid-America Pipeline Co., 490 U. S. 212, 220 (1989), another
litigant urged that “Congress' taxing power” can be dele-
gated only “with much stricter guidelines” than are normally
used. Citing J. W. Hampton, we again—and unanimously—
rejected that “two-tiered theory of nondelegation.” 490
U. S., at 220–221. “[N]othing” in the Constitution's text or
structure, Skinner explained, “distinguish[es] Congress'
power to tax from its other enumerated powers” “in terms

  2
    Although endorsing the same rule as Consumers' Research, the dissent
claims that the rule is merely an application of the intelligible-principle
test. See post, at 723–724. That is mistaken: The intelligible-principle
test requires an intelligible principle, not a “prescribed . . . tax rate.”
Post, at 723. So what we say about the Consumers' Research position
generally goes as well for the dissent's.
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    675

                           Opinion of the Court

of the scope and degree of discretionary authority that Con-
gress may delegate to the Executive.” Ibid. Nor, the
Court added, did history at all distinguish the two. See id.,
at 221 (“From its earliest days to the present, Congress,
when enacting tax legislation,” has at times delegated “dis-
cretionary authority” to the Executive). So whether or not
a tax is at issue—so say our cases—the usual nondelegation
standard applies. And that standard is, again, trained on
intelligible principles, not on numeric caps and “mathemati-
cal formula[s].” United States v. Rock Royal Co-operative,
Inc., 307 U. S. 533, 577 (1939); see supra, at 673.3
  The alternative test Consumers' Research and the dissent
propose also would throw a host of federal statutes into
doubt. Relying on this Court's nondelegation precedents,
Congress has often enacted statutes empowering agencies to
raise revenue without specifying a numeric cap or tax rate.
See Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners 7–9 (listing nine “ex-

Page Proof Pending Publication
ample[s]”). Indeed, such statutes are endemic in the sphere
of fnancial regulation. The Federal Reserve Board, for in-
stance, funds its operations by levying on Federal Reserve
Banks “an assessment suffcient to pay its estimated ex-
  3
    The dissent's attempt to deal with these precedents is not successful.
Relegating discussion of J. W. Hampton to a footnote, the dissent refuses
to acknowledge that decision's categorical rejection of a different nondele-
gation standard for tax statutes than for others. See post, at 737, n. 15.
The dissent contends that the tax at issue there could have met its own
rate-or-cap test, but glosses over that the Court instead asked only about
intelligible principles. See ibid. And although the dissent suggests oth-
erwise, J. W. Hampton's holding that the statute had an intelligible princi-
ple in no way hinged on the existence of a numeric rate or cap. See 276
U. S., at 404–405. The dissent's discussion of Skinner is not much better.
Our holding there compels the dissent to say that it is not proposing a
“different and stricter” test for “when Congress delegates the power to
tax.” Post, at 723. But in the same paragraph, the dissent does just
that: It asserts that a delegation involving the taxing power “must supply
more signifcant limits on an agency's discretion” than one involving other
Government powers. Ibid. And so the dissent collides with both J. W.
Hampton and Skinner.
676            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

penses.” 12 U. S. C. § 243. The Offce of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) likewise “collect[s] ” from OCC-
chartered banks an “assessment, fee, or other charge” as the
Offce “determines is necessary or appropriate to carry out
[its] responsibilities.” § 16. And the Deposit Insurance
Fund of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC),
which protects the savings of millions of Americans, is f-
nanced through charges on banks “which the Corporation
may by regulation prescribe, after giving due consideration
to the need to establish and maintain the [Fund's] reserve
ratio. ” § 1815(d)(1). In none of those (or many other)
revenue-raising statutes does a number appear. So all
would be on the constitutional chopping block under Con-
sumers' Research's reasoning.
   Consumers' Research is conficted about how to approach
that problem, but sometimes tries to draw a line between
taxes and fees. Our decision in National Cable Television
Page Proof Pending Publication
Assn., Inc. v. United States, 415 U. S. 336 (1974) (NCTA),
recognized that distinction, as Consumers' Research notes.
See Brief for Respondents 28. We there described “fees” as
“bestow[ing]” a reciprocal “beneft on the [payor], not shared
by other members of society.” NCTA, 415 U. S., at 341. By
contrast, “taxes” are expected to “inure[ ] to the beneft” of
the wider public. Id., at 343. In its brief, Consumers' Re-
search argues that its numeric-cap standard applies to both
taxes and fees: As to either, Congress's delegation to an
agency must include an “objective upper limit[ ].” Brief for
Respondents 37; see id., at 36–38. At argument, however,
Consumers' Research relied on the tax vs. fee distinction to
get out from under the long list of statutes its position places
in jeopardy. Most of those statutes, it argued, involve not
taxes but fees, where the charge refects simply “the value
of the beneft to the” payor. Tr. of Oral Arg. 134; see id., at
148. So, Consumers' Research suggested, if we label carrier
contributions “taxes” and then make only taxes subject to
the numeric-limit requirement, there would be minimal fall-
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   677

                          Opinion of the Court

out from adopting its position. See ibid. The dissent joins
Consumers' Research in pressing that argument. See post,
at 733–739.
   But the problems with going down that road are substan-
tial. First and as already shown, precedent forecloses it.
Indeed, in rejecting a stricter test for delegations made
“under Congress' taxing power,” Skinner specifcally noted
that its position rendered irrelevant the question (which, we
noted, “so exercised the District Court”) whether the
charges there were “user fees” or a “form of taxation.” 490
U. S., at 223. Either way, the Court held, the delegation in-
quiry was just the same, and just the usual one. See ibid.4
Second, Consumers' Research offers no argument for why
categorizing something as a fee rather than a tax should mat-
ter for delegation purposes. To the contrary, its brief sug-
gests the difference should make no difference—that instead
all revenue-raising measures should be treated the same.

Page Proof Pending Publication
Brief for Respondents 36–38; Tr. of Oral Arg. 132–133 (re-
peating the point). The distinction is proposed only as an
artifcial method for limiting the effects of a holding in Con-
sumers' Research's favor, should the court be too squeamish
to go all the way.
   And third, the distinction between taxes and fees, even if
occasionally needed, is a morass—or as the Government
(which levies both) puts it, “unbelievably murky in practice.”

   4
     The dissent once again does not know what to do with Skinner. See
supra, at 675, n. 3. According to the dissent, Skinner “did not invite
courts” to “disregard the basic distinction” between fees and taxes in con-
sidering the permissibility of delegations. Post, at 737. But we do not
know what else the Skinner Court did when it said the following: “In
light of th[e] conclusion” that the usual nondelegation test applies to tax
legislation, “we need not concern ourselves with the threshold question”
whether the “pipeline safety users `fees' ” at issue “are more properly
thought of as a form of taxation.” 490 U. S., at 223. Fees or taxes—it
just did not matter. And that was so, contra the dissent, irrespective of
whether the charge at issue was numeric—a feature that Skinner's treat-
ment of the purported fee/tax distinction never thought to mention.
678               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Opinion of the Court

Tr. of Oral Arg. 52. A charge is a “fee,” according to NCTA,
when it is for a “beneft” granted to the payor that is “not
shared by other members of society.” 415 U. S., at 341.
But articulating that test is a fair bit easier than applying it,
because it is often hard to say whether a beneft is so
“shared.” Consider the charge that banks pay to obtain
FDIC Deposit Insurance. See supra, at 676. The banks
beneft from that insurance (it helps them attract money and
prevents bank runs). So maybe the charge looks like a fee?
But then again, depositors also beneft (because the insur-
ance protects their money) and so does the wider public (be-
cause everyone gains from having a stable banking system).
So maybe the charge instead looks like a tax? Or take an-
other example: the OCC's assessments on banks. See ibid.
Are they fees because a bank must pay them to hold an OCC-
issued charter? Or are they taxes because the OCC uses

Page Proof Pending Publication
the funds collected for regulatory programs benefting the
public? Consumers' Research does not know. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 134 (describing the OCC statute as “kind of on the
line,” “tough,” and “maybe . . . questionable”).5

  5
    The dissent responds by replacing the test from NCTA—our leading
case on the subject—with a different one, which asks as well whether a
charge is for a cost imposed by the payor. Post, at 738. That alternative
test, the dissent promises, reveals that all the fnancial charges we have
discussed are fees, whereas universal-service contributions are taxes.
But even spotting the dissent its preferred test, the guaranteed clarity
fails to emerge. Take the dissent's description of the OCC's assessments:
They are fees because they “offset the costs the OCC incurs in fulflling
its statutory mandate to supervise, regulate, and charter national banks.”
Post, at 736, n. 14. Yet much the same can be said of universal-service
contributions: They pay for the costs of the programs the FCC is man-
dated by statute to implement. Or similarly, consider the dissent's de-
scription of Federal Reserve levies: They are fees because they pay for
“regulatory costs,” rather than providing general Government revenues.
Ibid. But again, that is also what carriers' contributions do, in funding
the costs of universal-service regulatory programs. So the dissent's new
test does not much clear away the mire.
                        Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                     679

                           Opinion of the Court

   Or fnally and most relevantly: What category do carriers'
contributions belong in? Universal service is of course a
public beneft. But carriers gain in tangible ways from hav-
ing an all-inclusive network, and they often receive direct
subsidies from the FCC's universal-service programs. For
those reasons, the carriers' main trade associations view the
contributions as fees. See id., at 76, 80. The Government,
by contrast, sees “genuine ambiguity” on the issue, but “as-
sum[es]” they are taxes. Id., at 52–53. It is a good thing
for the state of the law that we do not have to decide be-
tween the two, in this case or others raising a delegation
challenge.6
   And yet a greater problem inheres in the shared position
of Consumers' Research and the dissent: Whatever it applies
to ( just taxes or fees as well), its focus on numeric limits
produces absurd results, divorced from any reasonable un-
derstanding of constitutional values. Under that view, a
Page Proof Pending Publication
revenue-raising statute containing non-numeric, qualitative

   6
     The dissent's case for characterizing contributions as taxes only under-
scores the diffculty. Carriers, the dissent frst says, “do not gain any
special beneft” from the contributions they make. Post, at 738. But as
just noted, that would be news to the carriers: Although they pay the bill,
they are lined up here to defend universal service, because (in their law-
yer's words) they “beneft[ ] quite considerably” from the program. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 76. So next the dissent tries this one: The statutory scheme
creates a tax because it “takes money from some (carriers) and gives it to
others (libraries, schools, and the like).” Post, at 738. But again, carri-
ers both give and receive; the program, as it has from its beginnings,
reallocates money among them. See supra, at 665–666. And even put-
ting that fact aside, the dissent's test would turn some things it labels fees
into taxes. Consider FDIC insurance charges: They are funds the FDIC
takes from some (banks) and gives to others (depositors of failed banks).
See post, at 735, 738, 739, n. 17. The dissent asserts in response that
the FDIC's redistribution is different because “[t]he FDIC program is an
insurance plan.” Post, at 739, n. 17. But in proposing yet one more dis-
tinction to get everything lined up right, the dissent unwittingly proves
the point: The fee/tax distinction is a diffcult one, and Skinner was right
not to make the nondelegation inquiry ride on it.
680            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

standards can never pass muster, no matter how much guid-
ance those standards provide and how tight the constraints
they impose. But a revenue-raising statute with a numeric
limit will always pass muster, even if it effectively leaves
an agency with boundless power. Consider a hypothetical
raised at oral argument: Congress tells the FCC it can de-
mand payments from carriers of any amount it wants up to
$5 trillion. (The actual cost of universal service is, of
course, a tiny fraction of that amount.) According to Con-
sumers' Research, that statute is permissible because . . .
well, because Congress has set the $5 trillion fgure. See
id., at 124 (“[T]hen we would know that Congress itself has
made that determination”); see id., at 123–127; Brief for Re-
spondents 5, 63, 66; see also post, at 743–744. But so what?
The purpose of the nondelegation doctrine is to enforce limits
on the “degree of policy judgment that can be left to those
executing or applying the law.” Mistretta v. United States,

Page Proof Pending Publication
488 U. S. 361, 416 (1989) (Scalia, J., dissenting). The
anywhere-up-to-$5-trillion tax statute would not do that,
whereas a statute with qualitative limits well might. In ap-
proving the former and precluding the latter, the Consumers'
Research approach does nothing to vindicate the nondelega-
tion doctrine or, more broadly, the separation of powers.

                               B
   We therefore return to the usual intelligible-principle test
to decide whether the universal-service contribution scheme
violates the Constitution's nondelegation rule. The question
is, again, whether Section 254 adequately guides the FCC in
requiring contributions from carriers—whether it expresses
the “general policy” the FCC must pursue in setting contri-
bution amounts, as well as the “boundaries” it cannot cross.
American Power & Light, 329 U. S., at 105. Here, that in-
quiry into the nature of the FCC's discretion involves what
turn out to be two closely related questions. First, how
much money can the FCC raise through contributions? And
                    Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             681

                       Opinion of the Court

second, on what things can it spend those funds? We con-
sider each in turn, and fnd that Congress answered both.
Congress, that is, imposed ascertainable and meaningful
guideposts for the FCC to follow when carrying out its dele-
gated function of collecting and spending contributions
from carriers.
                             1
   As Consumers' Research notes, Section 254 imposes no
quantitative but only qualitative limits on how much money
the FCC can raise from carriers for universal service.
There is not a number or a rate in sight. Instead, the stat-
ute directs the FCC to collect the amount that is “suffcient”
to support the universal-service programs Congress has told
it to implement. §§ 254(b)(5), (d), (e). That language repli-
cates or resembles the statutory terms Congress has used
in other revenue-raising statutes, as described above. See
supra, at 675–676; see, e. g., 12 U. S. C. § 243 (instructing the
Page Proof Pending Publication
Federal Reserve Board to levy on banks “an assessment suf-
fcient to pay its estimated expenses”).
   Consumers' Research argues that, even under our usual
nondelegation test, the term “suffcient” does not do enough.
That is because, in the Consumers' Research view, it sets
only “a foor—not a ceiling—on the FCC's revenue-raising
power.” Brief for Respondents 56. Or to put the point dif-
ferently, Consumers' Research thinks that the statute gives
the FCC power, all on its own, to raise our hypothetical $5
trillion. See supra, at 679–680. And not unreasonably, it
thinks that would pose a constitutional problem.
   But in fact the word “suffcient” sets a foor and a ceiling
alike. An amount of money is “suffcient” for a purpose if
it is “[a]dequate” or “necessary” to achieve that purpose.
Black's Law Dictionary 1447 (7th ed. 1999). That means, of
course, that the FCC cannot raise less than is adequate or
necessary to fnance the universal-service programs Con-
gress wants. But it also means that the FCC cannot raise
more than that amount. Were the FCC to raise, say, twice
682            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

as much as needed, the revenue would not be “suffcient”
but instead excessive. Cf. Whitman, 531 U. S., at 475–476
(similarly understanding the term “requisite” to mean “not
lower or higher than is necessary”). Take another hypothet-
ical from oral argument. If you told a friend to order a “suf-
fcient” amount of food for fve people and 500 boxes of pizza
showed up at your house, you would not think he had fol-
lowed instructions. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 135. So too with
Congress and the Commission. Budgeting, to be sure, is not
an exact science, so in one quarter the Commission may col-
lect a bit more than it needs and in another a bit less. See
47 CFR §§ 54.709(b), (c) (telling the Administrator that if it
collects “excess” or “inadequate” funds in a given quarter, it
should compensate in the next one). But the Commission's
mandate is to raise what it takes to pay for universal-service
programs; if the Commission raises much beyond, as if it
raises much below, it violates the statute.

Page Proof Pending Publication
   And the Commission has long viewed the statute in just
that way. For many years, the Commission has construed
the suffcient-funding directive to call for raising “an afford-
able and sustainable amount of support that is adequate, but
no greater than necessary, to achieve the goals of the univer-
sal service program.” In re High-Cost Universal Serv. Sup-
port, 25 FCC Rcd. 4072, 4074 (2010); see Tr. of Oral Arg. 4
(Solicitor General explaining that Congress has authorized
the FCC to collect “only what's suffcient to achieve universal
service, so no more than needed to support specifed pro-
grams”). The Commission, in other words, sets the contri-
bution factor to raise just enough money—a “suffcient”
amount—to implement universal service as Congress
directed.
                               2
   To say that much, though, takes us only halfway, because
it raises the question: Suffcient for what? If Section 254's
universal-service program is itself indeterminate—so that
the FCC can turn it into anything the FCC wants—then the
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             683

                      Opinion of the Court

“suffciency” ceiling will do no serious work. The FCC
could operate—and collect contributions “suffcient” for—
either the most barebones or the most extravagant program.
But if Congress has given appropriate guidance about the
nature and content of universal service, then that plus the
“suffciency” ceiling will defeat this challenge to the contri-
bution system. For Congress will have provided intelligible
principles to guide the FCC as it raises funds.
   On this further, “for what” question, our nondelegation
precedents provide context—showing what kinds of statu-
tory schemes have passed, and what kinds have failed, the
demand that Congress give adequate guidance. Those that
have failed are fewer in number—in fact, only two—but offer
object lessons about the amount of latitude Congress can con-
fer. In one case, the statute empowered the President to
bar the transport of petroleum products while “establish[ing]
no criterion” and “declar[ing] no policy” for whether, when,
Page Proof Pending Publication
or how he should do so. Panama Refning Co. v. Ryan, 293
U. S. 388, 415 (1935). The statute in the second case was
even worse. It authorized the President to approve “codes
of fair competition” for “the government of trade and indus-
try throughout the country,” yet imposed “few restrictions”
and “set[ ] up no standards” aside from a “statement of the
general aims of rehabilitat[ing], correct[ing,] and expand-
[ing]” the economy. A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v.
United States, 295 U. S. 495, 521–522, 541–542 (1935). The
law thus gave the President “virtually unfettered” authority
to govern the Nation's trades and industries. Id., at 542.
   At the same time, we have found intelligible principles in
a host of statutes giving agencies signifcant discretion. So,
for example, we upheld a provision enabling an agency to set
air quality standards at levels “requisite to protect the public
health.” Whitman, 531 U. S., at 472. We sustained a dele-
gation to an agency to ensure that corporate structures did
not “unfairly or inequitably distribute voting power” among
security holders. American Power & Light, 329 U. S., at
684               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Opinion of the Court

104. And we affrmed authorizations to regulate in the
“public interest” and to set “just and reasonable” rates, be-
cause we thought the discretion given was not unbridled.
See, e. g., National Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 319
U. S. 190, 225–226 (1943); FPC v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320
U. S. 591, 600 (1944); see supra, at 665. Of course, our cases
did not examine those statutory phrases in isolation but in-
stead looked to the broader statutory contexts, which in-
formed their interpretation and supplied the content neces-
sary to satisfy the intelligible-principle test. See, e. g.,
National Broadcasting, 319 U. S., at 226 (“It is a mistaken
assumption” that the phrase “public interest” is “a mere gen-
eral reference to public welfare without any standard to
guide determinations”; rather, “[t]he purpose of the Act, the
requirements it imposes, and the context of the provision in
question show the contrary”); see also infra, at 690.
   Section 254, for its part, provides the FCC with determi-

Page Proof Pending Publication
nate standards for operating the universal-service program.
The statute makes clear whom the program is intended to
serve: those in rural and other high-cost areas (with a special
nod to rural hospitals), low-income consumers, and schools
and libraries. See §§ 254(b)(3), (6), (h)(1); see supra, at 666–
668. And in provisions defning universal service and stat-
ing the program's core “principles,” the statute provides spe-
cifc criteria for which services those statutory benefciaries
should receive. §§ 254(b), (c)(1). In deciding whether a
service falls within the program's ambit, the FCC must con-
sider whether the service has “been subscribed to by a sub-
stantial majority of residential customers.” § 254(c)(1)(B).
If that objective criterion is not met, the FCC generally may
not subsidize the service. So too, the service must be one
that can be made available to all consumers in all regions at
“reasonable[ ] and affordable rates”—so more a basic than a
budget-busting good. §§ 254(b)(1), (3).7 And still more, the
  7
   Of course, if a subsidy were high enough, even a luxury service could
be provided to the Act's benefciaries at an “affordable” rate. But that
would require setting contributions so high as to interfere with carriers'
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   685

                          Opinion of the Court

service must be “essential to education, public health, or pub-
lic safety”—a necessity, not a luxury, in order to live in the
world. § 254(c)(1)(A). The conditions, each alone and to-
gether, have bite, creating a bounded program. Section 254
instructs the Commission to provide to an identifed set of
recipients a defned sort of beneft—widely used, generally
affordable, and essential telecommunications services.
   That limited conception of universal service is rooted in its
history—except that the new statute, as compared with the
old, holds the FCC to more specifc requirements. As ear-
lier explained, the 1934 Act charged the FCC with pursuing
universal service—that is, with making available to all
Americans telecommunications services “at reasonable
charges.” § 151. As then understood, that objective did
not reach for the stars: Though quite important, it was also
“relatively modest.” Benjamin, Telecommunications Law
and Policy § 18.2, at 863. The idea was to “reduc[e] the costs
Page Proof Pending Publication
of basic telephone service and, in that way, increas[e] national
subscribership.” Ibid. By the time of the 1996 amend-
ments, though, new telecommunications technologies and
services had emerged. And so Congress enabled the FCC,
in carrying out universal-service programs, to do more. See
id., at 863–864; see, e. g., §§ 254(b)(6), (h)(1). But still the
statute's policy was a circumscribed one: to provide to all
(especially, the rural and poor) the services that most already
had, if those services were both necessary and affordable.
The key difference between the original statute and the
amended one is a matter of means, and on that score, the
latter provides far greater congressional guidance. Under
the 1934 Act, the FCC gave implicit (and often obscure) sub-
sidies under its general (i. e., “just and reasonable”) rate-
making authority. See supra, at 665; see also post, at 713
(explaining that in the pre-1996 regime, “[r]egulators
manipulated rates” to fund universal service). Under the

ability to provide other services, to other customers, affordably. The af-
fordability principle precludes that result. See §§ 254(b)(1), (3).
686              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Opinion of the Court

1996 Act, the FCC gives explicit (and transparent) subsidies
in accord with the detailed criteria described above. See
supra, at 666, 684–685. So today, when the FCC carries out
Congress's century-old commitment to universal service, the
statutory policy is clear and the statutory boundaries specifc.
   The proof is in the pudding: Each of the four programs
the FCC now operates under Section 254 refects Congress's
choices about universal service's scope and content. The
Lifeline program, which began under the original Act, ad-
vances a basic commitment. Now codifed, it helps make
phone service affordable to all Americans by providing a
modest monthly subsidy. See § 254( j); 47 CFR §§ 54.400–
54.424; supra, at 666, 668. The High Cost program similarly
implements a longstanding principle—to integrate rural
communities into the Nation's communications network.
See § 151; §§ 54.302–54.322; supra, at 665–666, 668. And it
does so now in accordance with the statutory directive to en-

Page Proof Pending Publication
sure that rural and other high-cost areas have access to
roughly the same needed services, at the same affordable
prices, as urban areas do. § 254(b)(3). The Commission's
other two programs, E-Rate and Rural Health, are of a piece.
Specifcally authorized in the amended Act, they underwrite
services essential to education and healthcare, with a focus on
underserved populations. § 254(h)(1); §§ 54.500–54.523,
54.600–54.633; supra, at 668. Not one of those important but
decidedly ordinary programs suggests an agency vested with
unbridled discretion. Each provides communications serv-
ices satisfying the Act's listed criteria to the Act's identifed
benefciaries. And maybe surprisingly (given what we are
used to when it comes to government programs), they have
done so at roughly constant infation-adjusted dollars. Com-
pare USAC, 2000 Annual Report 5 (charging carriers $7.4
billion in 1999 when so adjusted), with USAC, 2024 Annual
Report 18 (charging carriers $8.4 billion in 2024).8 That is
  8
   The dissent's more dramatic fgures rely on using the wrong baseline
year—1998 instead of 1999. According to the dissent: “In 1998, universal-
service disbursements totaled about $2.29 billion” whereas in 2024 they
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    687

                           Opinion of the Court

because in the amended Act, Congress made clear the param-
eters of the programs, and the FCC has operated within
them.9
   Consumers' Research and the dissent tell a different
story—that the Act gives the FCC boundless authority—but
the provisions they point to show nothing of the kind. They
frst pluck out a few words to argue that the criteria for
subsidizing services, described above, are not “real limit[s].”
Brief for Respondents 55; supra, at 684–685. On affordabil-
ity, both contend that because Section 254(b) states that
services “should”—rather than “shall”—be made available at
“reasonable[ ] and affordable rates,” there is in fact no such
requirement. Brief for Respondents 47–48; see post, at 729–
730. But that reading starts in the middle. The provision,
starting from the start, says that the FCC “shall” base all
universal-service policies on the principle (among others)
that services “should be available” at “reasonable[ ] and af-
Page Proof Pending Publication
fordable rates.” § 254(b)(1). The mandatory “shall” re-
quires the FCC to follow the affordability principle—which

were about $8.59 billion—“nearly double, adjusted for infation.” Post, at
718, 726. But that is because in 1998, some of the new statute's universal-
service programs were just getting off the ground. The Rural Health
program, for example, did not even begin accepting applications for fund-
ing until May of that year. USAC, 1999 Annual Report 6. The right
benchmark instead comes from the next year, when the programs Con-
gress authorized were up and running. Only after that point can the in-
crease in costs provide information about whether Congress adequately
guided the FCC's discretion—or instead allowed the FCC to run ram-
pant—going forward.
  9
    Two provisions of Section 254 authorize the FCC to fund “advanced”
and “additional” services. §§ 254(c)(3), (h)(2); see post, at 716, 726–727,
732–733. We have no occasion to address any nondelegation issues raised
by Sections 254(c)(3) and (h)(2) in particular. Consumers' Research does
not argue that Sections 254(c)(3) and (h)(2) are unconstitutional, and it
does not advance any arguments that are specifc to those provisions. In-
stead, it argues that the contribution scheme generally is unconstitutional,
and that the contribution factor should be set to zero. The Fifth Circuit
adopted that view as well, and to decide this case, we need say no more
than that those conclusions are wrong.
688            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

means providing all services at “reasonable[ ] and affordable
rates.” And similarly as to whether a service is widely used
and essential. Per Consumers' Research and the dissent,
Section 254(c)(1) says only that the FCC must “consider”
those criteria and thus establishes no more than a “weak[ ]
procedural requirement.” Brief for Respondents 54; see
post, at 716, 728–731. But the list of criteria the FCC
“shall” consider resides in the very “defnition” of the “serv-
ices” it can subsidize. § 254(c)(1). The statute, read sensi-
bly, does not tell the FCC to muse on those criteria before
developing its own. Rather, it tells the FCC to “consider,”
as to any given service, whether it satisfes the listed criteria
(and therefore can be subsidized). And that is, indeed, how
the Solicitor General, representing the FCC, understands
the provision. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 10, 27–29, 177–178.
   The dissent therefore fails in its related claim that the
FCC can balance different universal-service criteria against
Page Proof Pending Publication
each other—so, for example, fund a service because it is “es-
sential to education” even though it has not been adopted “by
a substantial majority” of customers. Post, at 716; see post,
at 727–728; supra, at 684–685. Again, the Solicitor General
has represented in this Court that each of the criteria has to
be met. Tr. of Oral Arg. 10, 27–29, 177–178. In any event,
and yet more important, we must “exercise [our] independent
judgment in deciding” what power Congress has conferred.
Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369, 412
(2024). And for all the reasons given above, we view the stat-
utory criteria—which, contra the dissent, post, at 727, defne
universal service—as separately mandatory. See § 254(c)(1);
supra, at 684–685, 687 and this page. Of course, the Commis-
sion may still have to strike balances in addressing those
criteria, along with the statute's other provisions. It may,
for example, have to decide whether to make a service more
affordable (by giving a larger subsidy) or instead extend it
to a broader swathe of recipients. But that kind of discre-
tion—balancing or no—does not raise a constitutional prob-
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            689

                      Opinion of the Court

lem: A “degree of policy judgment,” as we have explained,
“can be left to those executing or applying the law.” Whit-
man, 531 U. S., at 474–475.
   We likewise see no constitutional issue in Section
254(c)(1)'s description of universal service as an “evolving
level of telecommunications services that the Commission
shall establish periodically” in light of “advances in telecom-
munications and information” services. According to Con-
sumers' Research and the dissent, that language enables the
FCC to “redefne universal service” over time as it and only
it “sees ft.” Brief for Respondents 8, 54; see post, at 727.
But Congress's statement that universal service should
“evolve” is itself a direction—and a near-inevitable one,
given the reality of technological change. If universal serv-
ice did not evolve—if Congress had defned it as, say, a land-
line in every home (or, as the dissent would have it, “touch-
tone [phone] service,” post, at 728)—the program would have
Page Proof Pending Publication
long since become obsolete. The Act's embrace of evolu-
tion—the permission it gives the FCC to subsidize different
services now than 30 years ago—ensures that the universal-
service program will be of enduring utility. But that confer-
ral of discretion does not strip the statute of standards and
constraints. The Commission still may fund only essential,
widely used, and affordable services, for the beneft of only
designated recipients. See supra, at 684–685. So Congress
has ensured that the Commission will continue to carry out
the same objectives according to the same criteria and prin-
ciples, even as it has allowed adaptation to a changing tech-
nological landscape.
   Finally, we do not view as Consumers' Research does the
provision in Section 254 enabling the FCC to articulate “[a]d-
ditional principles,” beyond the six listed, to guide its
universal-service programs. § 254(b)(7); see supra, at 668.
Recall that the added principles are ones the FCC “deter-
mine[s] are necessary and appropriate for the protection of
the public interest, convenience, and necessity and are con-
690            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

sistent with this chapter.” See supra, at 668. As Consum-
ers' Research sees it, the FCC can, through devising those
principles, “rewrite its own authority.” Brief for Respond-
ents 50 (capitalization altered); see post, at 727. But that is
not so because, again, the added principles must be “consist-
ent with” the rest of the statute. They cannot change any
of the statute's other principles, much less its conditions on
what subsidies can go toward and who can receive them.
The new principles can only operate, within those statutory
parameters, to further channel the FCC's discretion. So
they are a way to superimpose self-restraint on congres-
sional restraint, which is hardly improper. And the provi-
sion's broadly framed reference to the “public interest” sug-
gests nothing to the contrary. The public-interest
requirement lies on top of the consistency requirement—con-
nected with an “and,” not an “or”—and anyway is comple-
mentary to it. For we have long held that “the words `pub-
Page Proof Pending Publication
lic interest' in a regulatory statute” do not encompass “the
general public welfare” but rather “take meaning from the
purposes of the regulatory legislation.” NAACP v. FPC,
425 U. S. 662, 669 (1976); see New York Central Securities
Corp. v. United States, 287 U. S. 12, 24–25 (1932); see supra,
at 684. So the whole of the “[a]dditional principles” provi-
sion supplies a means of further implementing, rather than
dispensing with, Congress's instructions.
   In a sense, each of the arguments Consumers' Research
and the dissent make about Section 254 suffers from the
same faw. At every turn, they read Section 254 extrava-
gantly, the better to create a constitutional problem. As
earlier seen, “suffcient” means to Consumers' Research as
much as the FCC wants, a foor without a ceiling. See
supra, at 681. The statute's mandatory conditions on fund-
ing services are instead mere suggestions, for the FCC to
observe or not as it chooses. See supra, at 687–689. The
phrase “evolving level” of service licenses the FCC to create
a whole new program, unhindered by the statute's existing
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            691

                      Opinion of the Court

standards and boundaries. See supra, at 689. And the pos-
sibility of “[a]dditional principles” coming from the FCC
somehow subverts the limiting principles Congress put on
the FCC, so that everything about universal service is up
for grabs. See supra, at 689–690. All in all, the arguments
do not show statutory construction at its best. Nor, relat-
edly, do they show proper respect for a coordinate branch
of Government. Statutes (including regulatory statutes)
should be read, if possible, to comport with the Constitu-
tion, not to contradict it. See, e. g., Ashwander v. TVA, 297
U. S. 288, 348 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring); Industrial
Union Dept., AFL–CIO v. American Petroleum Institute,
448 U. S. 607, 646 (1980) (plurality opinion); West Virginia v.
EPA, 597 U. S. 697, 722–723 (2022). That disposition no-
where appears in the efforts Consumers' Research and the
dissent make to force Section 254 past the Constitution's
breaking point.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Properly understood, the universal-service contribution
scheme clears the nondelegation bar. The policy it ex-
presses is clear and limiting. If, says the statute, a substan-
tial majority of Americans has access to a communications
service that is both affordable and essential to modern life,
then other Americans should have access to that service too.
And to make that happen, the statute continues, carriers
should kick in the needed funds. At bottom, that is all
the contribution scheme challenged here accomplishes.
Through that statutory mechanism, the FCC raises suffcient
funds (neither more nor less than needed) to bring to under-
served Americans, mainly in rural and low-income communi-
ties, a bounded and commonplace set of communications
services. The FCC no doubt exercises signifcant discretion
in carrying out that charge. But it is discretion tethered
to legislative judgments about the scope and content of the
universal-service program. And so the main delegation at
issue here, from Congress to the Commission, does not offend
the Constitution.
692            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

                              III
   The next question Consumers' Research raises is whether
a different delegation, now from the Commission to the Ad-
ministrator (which, recall, is a private, not-for-proft corpora-
tion), independently fouts a constitutional command. Here,
Consumers' Research invokes what is commonly called the
private nondelegation doctrine. See Brief for Respondents
74–75. In the leading case of Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 298
U. S. 238, 310–311 (1936), this Court struck down a statute
authorizing certain coal producers to set maximum hours and
minimum wages for the rest of the industry. We explained
that the statute involved “delegation in its most obnoxious
form” because it was made to “private persons whose inter-
ests” are often “adverse to the interests of others.” Id., at
311; see Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 537. Consumers'
Research contends that the FCC has in like manner con-
ferred governmental power on a private party, by (in its de-
Page Proof Pending Publication
scription) giving the Administrator carte blanche to set the
contribution factor, which then determines what individual
carriers pay into the Fund. See Brief for Respondents 3–4,
75; supra, at 668–670.
   Carter Coal, though, has a counterpart case, addressing
how Government agencies may rely on advice and assistance
from private actors. In Sunshine Anthracite Coal Co. v.
Adkins, 310 U. S. 381, 388 (1940), this Court considered a
statute, enacted in response to Carter Coal, permitting
boards of coal companies to propose minimum coal prices to
a Government agency for “approv[al], disapprov[al], or modi-
f[cation].” That arrangement, we held, was “unquestion-
ably valid.” 310 U. S., at 399. After all, we explained, the
private boards “function[ed] subordinately to” the agency
and were subject to its “authority and surveillance.” Ibid.
As long as an agency thus retains decision-making power, it
may enlist private parties to give it recommendations.
   Here, the Administrator is broadly subordinate to the
Commission. The FCC appoints the Administrator's Board
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    693

                           Opinion of the Court

of Directors and approves its budget. See 47 CFR
§§ 54.703(b)–(c), 54.715(c). The Administrator “may not
make policy,” and must carry out all its tasks “consistent
with” the FCC's rules, “orders, written directives, and other
instructions.” § 54.702(c); Memorandum of Understanding
Between the Federal Communications Commission and the
Universal Service Administrative Company 2 (Oct. 17, 2024)
(Memorandum of Understanding). And anyone aggrieved
by an action of the Administrator may seek de novo review
by the Commission. §§ 54.719–54.725. So in the relation-
ship between the two, the Commission dominates.
   And critically, that is as true in determining the contribu-
tion factor as in other matters: Although the Administrator
plays an advisory role, the Commission alone has decision-
making authority. Recall that each quarter's contribution
factor is a function of the carriers' projected revenues and
the Fund's projected expenses. See supra, at 668–669.

Page Proof Pending Publication
The Administrator makes the initial projections. On the
revenue side, that means just doing arithmetic: The carriers
submit their projections on FCC forms and the Administra-
tor adds them up. See §§ 54.709(a)(2)–(3), 54.711(a). On the
expense side, the Administrator's estimates involve consider-
ably greater effort—but still no policy-making. The FCC's
rules implementing the Act dictate the programs' scope: For
example, they set eligibility criteria for benefciaries, provide
formulas for calculating subsidies, and impose some funding
caps. See, e. g., §§ 54.410, 54.507, 54.604–54.606.10 Working
within those rules, the Administrator estimates the pro-
grams' cost. It then publicly reports those projections,
along with supporting documents, to the Commission—on
the revenue side, at least 30 days before a quarter starts, on

  10
     If anything in the rules, or the Act itself, is “unclear, or do[es] not
address a particular situation, the Administrator shall seek guidance from
the Commission.” 47 CFR § 54.702(c). So if the Administrator confronts
an unsettled issue as it makes projections, it must ask the Commission
rather than resolve the problem itself.
694            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

the expense side, at least 60. See § 54.709(a)(3). That gives
the Commission a chance to review—and, if needed, to re-
vise—the projections before approving fnal fgures. See
ibid. When the review process is complete, the Commission
sets the contribution factor and posts it in a public notice.
See ibid. The Commission then has 14 days to make addi-
tional changes before the factor is “deemed approved.”
Ibid. So the Commission is, throughout, the fnal author-
ity—just as the agency was in Sunshine Anthracite. The
Administrator, following the FCC's rules, makes recommen-
dations. But the Commission decides whether or how to use
them in setting the contribution factor.
   In contending otherwise, Consumers' Research misunder-
stands the regulatory scheme. Its primary argument rests
on the words “deemed approved” in the FCC's regulations.
Consumers' Research takes that to mean that the Adminis-
trator's projections can “take legal effect” just by the “deem-
Page Proof Pending Publication
[ing]” mechanism—that is, without receiving “formal FCC
approval.” Brief for Respondents 80. But that account ig-
nores everything that happens before the 14-day period fol-
lowing public notice. Prior to that time, the Commission
reviews the Administrator's projections, and either revises
or approves them. Then, the Commission sets the contribu-
tion factor based on the vetted projections and issues it to
the public. So the Administrator's projections can have only
the legal (or, indeed, practical) effect the Commission decides
they should. Not the Administrator, but the Commission
endorses fnal projections, converts them into a contribution
factor, and formally promulgates them. At the end of all
that action, the “deemed approved” provision just operates
to shut off an additional two-week opportunity the Commis-
sion has to revise the published contribution factor—because
something (including public comments like Consumers' Re-
search submitted) has caused it to change its mind. That
provision does nothing to negate the Commission decision-
making that has already taken place.
                    Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             695

                       Opinion of the Court

   The alternative argument Consumers' Research makes
does not fare any better. Here, Consumers' Research ap-
pears to concede that the FCC approves the projections
going into the contribution factor; the problem instead is that
the approval is too of ten automatic—simply “rubber-
stamp[ing].” Id., at 82. But the relevant legal question is
not how often the FCC revises the Administrator's projec-
tions, just as in Sunshine Anthracite it was not how often the
agency rejected the coal companies' pricing advice. It is suf-
fcient in such schemes that the private party's recommenda-
tions (as is true here) cannot go into effect without an agency's
say-so, regardless of how freely given. See 310 U. S., at 399.
This case suggests at least one reason why: It may not be clear
what the ratio of approvals to rejections actually means. On
the view of Consumers' Research, the infrequency with
which the Commission changes the Administrator's publicly
submitted projections shows that it simply is not paying at-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tention. But an amicus brief submitted by former FCC
Commissioners offers an alternative explanation—that the
Administrator “informally shares its projections” with the
Commission before it publicly submits them, so that much of
the discussion between the two occurs behind the scenes.
See Brief for Bipartisan Former Commissioners of the FCC
as Amici Curiae 11; see also Memorandum of Understanding
7 (establishing that informal procedure). And yet a third
account might suggest that the absence of frequent dispute
refects the limited role the Administrator performs in esti-
mating the expenses of programs whose contours FCC regu-
lations precisely defne. See supra, at 693–694. The expla-
nation, that is, would lie in the narrow scope of the
assignment the FCC has given to the Administrator.
   So the Commission's transfer of accounting functions to
the Administrator offers no reason for holding the universal-
service contribution scheme invalid. In every way that
matters to the constitutional inquiry, the Commission, not
the Administrator, is in control.
696            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                      Opinion of the Court

                              IV
   Consumers' Research almost wholly ignores the basis of
the decision below: that the “combination” of Congress's
grant of authority to the FCC and the FCC's reliance on the
Administrator for fnancial projections violates the Constitu-
tion, even if neither one does so alone. See 109 F. 4th, at 778
(emphasis in original). But because that theory accounts for
the decision we are reviewing, we cannot close without ad-
dressing it briefy.
   The Fifth Circuit, as noted earlier, founded its combination
theory—that a constitutional non-violation plus a constitu-
tional non-violation may equal a constitutional violation—on
this Court's decision in Free Enterprise Fund. See supra,
at 671. There, we struck down a statute because it gave an
executive offcer two “layers of protection” from the Presi-
dent's removal authority: The President was “restricted in
his ability to remove a principal offcer, who [was] in turn
Page Proof Pending Publication
restricted in his ability to remove an inferior offcer.” 561
U. S., at 483–484. Even granting that each layer of good-
cause protection was alone permissible, we thought the com-
bination was too much. The two together, more than either
alone, insulated the offcer from the President's fring power,
thus super-charging the offcer's “independence.” Id., at
496. That holding, in the Fifth Circuit's view, gave rise to
a “general principle”: “[T]wo constitutional parts do not nec-
essarily add up to a constitutional whole.” 109 F. 4th, at
779. And the court thought that principle applied here.
Even if Congress lawfully conferred discretion on the Com-
mission and the Commission lawfully sought assistance from
the Administrator, the combination was both “unprece-
dented” and “incompatible” with “democratic accountability.”
Id., at 779, 783–784. So what the Fifth Circuit called “the
universal service contribution mechanism's double-layered
delegation” had to go. Id., at 784.
   But the court's analogy and associated logic do not work.
In Free Enterprise Fund, each of the two layers of for-cause
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)           697

                      Opinion of the Court

protection limited the same thing—the President's power to
remove executive offcers. And when combined, each com-
pounded the other's effect, so that the President was left
with no real authority. Or otherwise said, the two layers of
restrictions operated on a single axis with the one exacerbat-
ing (we thought exponentially) the other. But that reason-
ing has no bearing here. A law violates the traditional (or
call it, for comparison's sake, “public”) nondelegation doc-
trine when it authorizes an agency to legislate. And a law—
whether a statute or, as here, a regulation—violates the pri-
vate nondelegation doctrine when it allows non-governmental
entities to govern. Those doctrines do not operate on the
same axis (save if it is defned impossibly broadly). So a
measure implicating (but not violating) one does not com-
pound a measure implicating (but not violating) the other, in
a way that pushes the combination over a constitutional line.
“Two wrong claims do not make one that is right.” Pacifc
Page Proof Pending Publication
Bell Telephone Co. v. linkLine Communications, Inc., 555
U. S. 438, 457 (2009). If a regulatory scheme authorizes nei-
ther executive legislation nor private governance, it does not
somehow authorize an unlawful amalgam. Contra the Fifth
Circuit, a meritless public nondelegation challenge plus a
meritless private nondelegation challenge cannot equal a
meritorious “combination” claim.
  And indeed Sunshine Anthracite as well as said so before.
As earlier noted, that case involved a private nondelegation
challenge—that a board of coal companies advising an
agency played too great a role in setting industry prices.
See 310 U. S., at 399; supra, at 692. In addition, the case
involved a public nondelegation challenge—that even the
agency could not set prices because Congress had failed to
provide it with suffcient guidance. See 310 U. S., at 397–
399. The Court discussed and rejected the one challenge;
and then it discussed and rejected the other. See ibid.
And then the Court stopped. It did not think some further
“combination” analysis was required. That was because (1)
698            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                    Kavanaugh, J., concurring

an executive agency exercising only executive power, plus
(2) a private entity exercising no government power (but
merely giving advice) equals (3) a permissible constitu-
tional arrangement.
                             V
   When Congress amended the Communications Act in 1996,
it provided the Commission with clear guidance on how to
promote universal service using carrier contributions. Con-
gress laid out the “general policy” to be achieved, the “princi-
ple[s]” and standards the FCC must use in pursuing that
policy, and the “boundaries” the FCC may not cross. J. W.
Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409; American Power & Light, 329
U. S., at 105. Our precedents do not require more. Nor do
they prevent the Commission, in carrying out Congress's pol-
icy, from obtaining the Administrator's assistance in project-
ing revenues and expenses, so that carriers pay the needed
amount. For nearly three decades, the work of Congress
Page Proof Pending Publication
and the Commission in establishing universal-service pro-
grams has led to a more fully connected country. And it has
done so while leaving fully intact the separation of powers
integral to our Constitution.
   We accordingly reverse the judgment of the Court of Ap-
peals for the Fifth Circuit and remand for further proceed-
ings consistent with this opinion.
                                               It is so ordered.

  Justice Kavanaugh, concurring.
   This case presents a narrow but important nondelegation
question: May Congress authorize the Federal Communica-
tions Commission to determine the monetary amount “suff-
cient” to fund certain telecommunications services, which in
turn is the amount that telecommunications carriers must
contribute to the Universal Service Fund? Applying the
longstanding “intelligible principle” test set forth by this
Court's precedents, the Court today upholds that congres-
sional delegation to the FCC. See Skinner v. Mid-America
                         Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    699

                        Kavanaugh, J., concurring

Pipeline Co., 490 U. S. 212 (1989); J. W. Hampton, Jr., & Co.
v. United States, 276 U. S. 394 (1928).
   I join the Court's opinion and write separately to make
two points. First, I will briefy outline what I understand
to be the background and rationale behind the intelligible
principle test that the Court has long used to assess congres-
sional delegations of authority to the Executive Branch.
Second, I will explain why congressional delegations to inde-
pendent agencies—as distinct from delegations to the Presi-
dent and executive agencies—raise substantial questions
under Article II of the Constitution.

                                      I
                                     A
   From the start in 1789, Congress has delegated to the
President the power to exercise discretion and policymaking
authority when implementing legislation.1 Those delega-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tions have been a regular feature of American Government
ever since.2
   1
     In this opinion, I will refer to congressional delegations to the Presi-
dent, although statutes sometimes delegate to executive offcers or agen-
cies rather than to the President. Those delegations to executive offcers
and agencies, in my view, are not analytically distinct for present purposes
from delegations to the President because the President controls, super-
vises, and directs those executive offcers and agencies. See Myers v.
United States, 272 U. S. 52, 163–164 (1926). Delegations to executive of-
fcers and agencies are thus de facto delegations to the President.
   2
     Delegations of various kinds began almost immediately after the new
Congress frst convened in 1789—although, to be sure, the Federal Gov-
ernment did not regulate private conduct in as many areas or as exten-
sively as it does today. See, e. g., Act of Sept. 29, 1789, ch. 24, 1 Stat. 95
(directing the payment of military pensions to wounded Revolutionary
War soldiers “under such regulations as the President of the United States
may direct”); Act of Apr. 10, 1790, ch. 7, § 1, 1 Stat. 109–110 (authorizing
the Secretary of State, Secretary of War, and Attorney General to issue
patents “if they shall deem the invention or discovery suffciently useful
and important”); Act of July 22, 1790, ch. 33, § 1, 1 Stat. 137 (authorizing
executive offcials to issue licenses “to carry on any trade or intercourse
700               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                       Kavanaugh, J., concurring

   The Court has generally permitted such delegations. As
to the text of the Constitution, the Court has rejected argu-
ments that the President impermissibly wields legislative
power when exercising discretion or policymaking authority
delegated by Congress. Instead, the Court has reasoned
that the President ordinarily exercises “executive Power”
under Article II when implementing legislation—even if he
employs discretion or policymaking authority when doing so
and even if the Executive Branch issues legally binding regu-
lations. See, e. g., Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361,
386, n. 14 (1989) (“[R]ulemaking power originates in the Leg-
islative Branch and becomes an executive function only when
delegated by the Legislature to the Executive Branch”); see
also Loving v. United States, 517 U. S. 748, 777 (1996)
(Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)
(“What Congress does is to assign responsibilities to the
Executive; and when the Executive undertakes those as-
Page Proof Pending Publication
signed responsibilities it acts, not as the `delegate' of Con-
gress, but as the agent of the People”); J. Manning, The Non-
delegation Doctrine as a Canon of Avoidance, 2000 S. Ct. Rev.
223, 240, n. 90 (“The Court apparently believes that when a
statute sets down an intelligible principle, the agency can be
thought of as implementing legislative directions, rather
than exercising legislative authority. . . . Under that view, the

with the Indian tribes . . . to any proper person,” and stipulating that the
offcials and licensees “shall be governed in all things touching the said
trade and intercourse, by such rules and regulations as the President shall
prescribe”); Act of Feb. 20, 1792, § 3, 1 Stat. 234 (granting the Postmaster
General discretion to choose among post roads and means of carrying
mail); Act of June 4, 1794, ch. 41, § 1, 1 Stat. 372 (granting the President
authority to lay embargoes “whenever, in his opinion, the public safety
shall so require,” and “under such regulations as the circumstances of the
case may require”); Act of May 27, 1796, ch. 31, 1 Stat. 474 (authorizing
the President to direct offcers “to aid in the execution of quarantine . . .
in such manner as may to him appear necessary”); Act of July 9, 1798, § 22,
1 Stat. 589 (empowering federal tax commissioners to change property tax
assessments “as shall appear to be just and equitable”).
                        Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                  701

                       Kavanaugh, J., concurring

agency is engaged in law `execution,' rather than receiving
delegated legislative authority”).3
   The history of congressional delegations and the Court's
understanding of Article II's text correspond to what the
Court has described as the practicalities of legislative and
executive action. Congress delegates at least in part be-
cause it must adapt legislation to “complex conditions involv-
ing a host of details with which the national legislature can-
not deal directly.” A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v.
United States, 295 U. S. 495, 530 (1935); Panama Refning
Co. v. Ryan, 293 U. S. 388, 421 (1935). And the Constitution
“has never been regarded as denying to Congress the neces-
sary resources of fexibility and practicality.” Schechter
Poultry, 295 U. S., at 530; Panama Refning, 293 U. S., at
421. That fexibility enables Congress “to perform its func-
tion in laying down policies and establishing standards, while
leaving to selected instrumentalities the making of subordi-

Page Proof Pending Publication
nate rules within prescribed limits and the determination of
facts to which the policy as declared by the legislature is to
apply.” Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 530; Panama Re-
fning, 293 U. S., at 421. Even when the legislature might
want to legislate more specifcally in certain circumstances,
a “certain degree of discretion, and thus of lawmaking, in-
heres in most executive . . . action.” Whitman v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 475 (2001) (quotation
marks omitted).

  3
    In INS v. Chadha, the Court similarly explained the point: The “At-
torney General acts in his presumptively Art. II capacity when he admin-
isters the Immigration and Nationality Act. Executive action under leg-
islatively delegated authority that might resemble `legislative' action in
some respects is not subject to the approval of both Houses of Congress
and the President for the reason that the Constitution does not so require.
That kind of Executive action is always subject to check by the terms of
the legislation that authorized it; and if that authority is exceeded it is
open to judicial review as well as the power of Congress to modify or
revoke the authority entirely.” 462 U. S. 919, 953–954, n. 16 (1983) (em-
phasis added).
702            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                    Kavanaugh, J., concurring

   Although the Court has ruled that congressional delega-
tions to the President are permissible as a matter of constitu-
tional text and history, the Court has not said that “anything
goes” with respect to those delegations. As Justice Gor-
such rightly says, Congress may not give “the President or
an executive agency a blank check to legislate.” Post, at 721
(dissenting opinion). So “Members of Congress could not,
even if they wished, vote all power to the President and ad-
journ sine die.” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 415 (Scalia, J., dis-
senting). Congress likewise cannot merely assign the Presi-
dent to take over the legislative role as to a particular
subject matter. See Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 537–
542; Panama Refning, 293 U. S., at 430. Rather, the Court
has said, any congressional grant of authority must supply
some guidance to the President—otherwise the President
would no longer be exercising “executive Power” when im-
plementing legislation.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   But the question of where to draw that line can be diffcult:
At what point does a broad statutory delegation transform
from (i) a permissible grant of discretion or policymaking
authority for the President to exercise when implementing
legislation into (ii) an impermissible delegation of legislative
power? Justice Scalia phrased the issue this way: “Once
it is conceded, as it must be, that no statute can be entirely
precise, and that some judgments, even some judgments in-
volving policy considerations, must be left to the offcers exe-
cuting the law . . . , the debate over unconstitutional delega-
tion becomes a debate not over a point of principle but over
a question of degree.” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 415 (dissent-
ing opinion).
   To address that question of degree and ensure that the
President is exercising executive power when implementing
legislation, the Court in 1928 adopted the “intelligible princi-
ple” test. In its unanimous opinion in J. W. Hampton, Jr., &
Co. v. United States, the Court speaking through Chief Jus-
tice (and former President) Taft stated: “If Congress shall
                     Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             703

                     Kavanaugh, J., concurring

lay down by legislative act an intelligible principle to which
the person or body authorized to [act] is directed to conform,
such legislative action is not a forbidden delegation of legisla-
tive power.” 276 U. S. 394, 409 (1928) (emphasis added).
Rather, when implementing legislation that contains an in-
telligible principle, the President is exercising executive
power. The inverse is also true: When Congress grants au-
thority to the President without an intelligible principle to
confne his action, Congress has impermissibly delegated leg-
islative power, although the Court has found that to occur
only “rarely. ” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 419 (Scalia, J.,
dissenting).
   The intelligible principle test recognizes that “[a]t some
point the responsibilities assigned can become so extensive
and so unconstrained that Congress has in effect delegated
its legislative power.” Loving, 517 U. S., at 777 (Scalia, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment). But “until
Page Proof Pending Publication
that point of excess is reached there exists . . . no delegation”
of legislative power “at all.” Ibid.
   For 97 years, the intelligible principle test set forth in J. W.
Hampton has formed the foundation of the Court's nondele-
gation doctrine. Under the test, as then-Justice Rehnquist
succinctly framed it, Congress may “lay down the general
policy and standards that animate the law, leaving the
agency to refne those standards, `fll in the blanks,' or apply
the standards to particular cases.” Industrial Union Dept.,
AFL–CIO v. American Petroleum Institute, 448 U. S. 607,
675 (1980) (opinion concurring in judgment).
   To be clear, the intelligible principle test is not toothless.
But it does operate in a way that respects the President's
Article II authority to execute the laws—that is, to exercise
discretion and policymaking authority within the limits set
by Congress and without undue judicial interference. See,
e. g., Whitman, 531 U. S., at 472–476; Youngstown Sheet &
Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U. S. 579, 635 (1952) (Jackson, J.,
concurring) (“When the President acts pursuant to an ex-
704               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                        Kavanaugh, J., concurring

press or implied authorization of Congress, his authority is
at its maximum, for it includes all that he possesses in his
own right plus all that Congress can delegate”). Notably,
the intelligible principle test was accepted and applied over
the years by Justice Scalia, Chief Justice Rehnquist, and
Chief Justice Taft—three jurists who, based on their Execu-
tive Branch experience and judicial philosophies, deeply ap-
preciated the risks of undue judicial interference with the
operations of the Presidency. See Whitman, 531 U. S., at
472–476 (Scalia, J., joined by Rehnquist, C. J., among others);
Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 371–379 (majority opinion joined by
Rehnquist, C. J.); id., at 415–416 (Scalia, J., dissenting); In-
dustrial Union, 448 U. S., at 673–676, 685–686 (Rehnquist,
J., concurring in judgment); J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409
(Taft, C. J.); cf. W. Kelley, Justice Scalia, the Nondelegation
Doctrine, and Constitutional Argument, 92 Notre Dame
L. Rev. 2107 (2017). The intelligible principle test has had
Page Proof Pending Publication
staying power—perhaps because of the diffculty of agreeing
on a workable and constitutionally principled alternative, or
because it has been thought that a stricter test could dimin-
ish the President's longstanding Article II authority to im-
plement legislation.4
   In any event, there of course can be diffcult questions
about how to apply the intelligible principle test to particular
statutes. See Industrial Union, 448 U. S., at 646 (plurality
opinion of Stevens, J.); id., at 685–686 (Rehnquist, J., concur-
ring in judgment). But I agree with how the Court has ap-
plied the test in this case.

  4
    Presidents of varying policy views and political affliations have ac-
cepted or advocated in favor of the intelligible principle test. See, e. g.,
Reply Brief for United States 3–6 (Trump); Brief for United States 19–38
(Biden); Brief for United States in Gundy v. United States, O. T. 2018, No.
17–6086, pp. 14–22 (Trump); Brief for United States in Whitman v. Ameri-
can Trucking Assns., Inc., O. T. 2000, No. 99–1257 etc., pp. 21–26 (Clinton);
Brief for United States in Mistretta v. United States, O. T. 1988, No. 87–
7028 etc., pp. 20–25 (Reagan).
                    Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            705

                    Kavanaugh, J., concurring

                                B
   I see no need in this case to try to spell out a defnitive
guide for applying the intelligible principle test, and it would
probably not be possible to do so anyway. It is important,
however, to emphasize three points.
   First, as both the Court and Justice Gorsuch agree,
under the intelligible principle test, “the degree of agency
discretion that is acceptable varies according to the scope of
the power congressionally conferred.” Whitman, 531 U. S.,
at 475; see ante, at 673; post, at 721 (dissenting opinion).
Congressional delegations of authority to the President
“must be judged `according to common sense and the inher-
ent necessities of the governmental co-ordination.' ” Indus-
trial Union, 448 U. S., at 675 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in
judgment) (quoting J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 406).
   Second, many of the broader structural concerns about ex-
pansive delegations have been substantially mitigated by
Page Proof Pending Publication
this Court's recent case law in related areas—in particular
(i) the Court's rejection of so-called Chevron deference and
(ii) the Court's application of the major questions canon of
statutory interpretation. Cf. Paul v. United States, 589
U. S. 1087 (2019) (statement of Kavanaugh, J., respecting
denial of certiorari).
   To elaborate: Although the nondelegation doctrine's in-
telligible principle test has historically not packed much
punch in constricting Congress's authority to delegate, the
President generally must act within the confnes set by Con-
gress when he implements legislation. So the President's
actions when implementing legislation are constrained—
namely, by the scope of Congress's authorization and by any
restrictions set forth in that statutory text. See Loper
Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369, 394–396,
404 (2024).
   On top of that, when interpreting a statute and determin-
ing the limits of the statutory text, courts presume that Con-
gress, in the domestic sphere, has not delegated authority to
706            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                   Kavanaugh, J., concurring

the President to issue major rules—that is, rules of great
political and economic signifcance—unless Congress clearly
says as much. See West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U. S. 697, 721–
724 (2022). Courts “presume that Congress intends to make
major policy decisions itself, not leave those decisions to
agencies.” Id., at 723 (quotation marks omitted). That
major questions canon refects both background separation
of powers understandings and the commonsense interpretive
maxim that Congress does not usually “hide elephants in
mouseholes” when granting authority to the President.
Whitman, 531 U. S., at 468; see, e. g., Biden v. Nebraska, 600
U. S. 477, 501–506 (2023); FDA v. Brown & Williamson To-
bacco Corp., 529 U. S. 120, 159–160 (2000); Industrial Union,
448 U. S., at 645 (plurality opinion); ICC v. Cincinnati,
N. O. & T. P. R. Co., 167 U. S. 479, 494–495, 509 (1897).
   Third, in the national security and foreign policy realms,
the nondelegation doctrine (whatever its scope with respect
Page Proof Pending Publication
to domestic legislation) appropriately has played an even
more limited role in light of the President's constitutional
responsibilities and independent Article II authority. See
Loving, 517 U. S., at 772–773; Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 636,
n. 2 (Jackson, J., concurring); Zemel v. Rusk, 381 U. S. 1, 17–
18 (1965); United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp., 299
U. S. 304, 319–322 (1936); Marshall Field & Co. v. Clark, 143
U. S. 649, 691 (1892). In “the area of foreign affairs, Con-
gress `must often accord to the President a degree of discre-
tion and freedom from statutory restriction which would not
be admissible were domestic affairs alone involved.' ” In-
dustrial Union, 448 U. S., at 684 (Rehnquist, J., concurring
in judgment) (quoting Curtiss-Wright, 299 U. S., at 320).
   In addition, the major questions canon has not been ap-
plied by this Court in the national security or foreign policy
contexts, because the canon does not refect ordinary con-
gressional intent in those areas. On the contrary, the usual
understanding is that Congress intends to give the President
substantial authority and fexibility to protect America and
                        Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   707

                       Kavanaugh, J., concurring

the American people—and that Congress specifes limits on
the President when it wants to restrict Presidential power
in those national security and foreign policy domains. See
Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 635–638 (Jackson, J., concurring);
see also Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U. S. 507, 519 (2004) (plural-
ity opinion); Dames & Moore v. Regan, 453 U. S. 654, 678–
679 (1981); Zemel, 381 U. S., at 8–9; Al–Bihani v. Obama, 619
F. 3d 1, 38–41, 48–52 (CADC 2010) (Kavanaugh, J., concur-
ring in denial of rehearing en banc); C. Bradley & J. Gold-
smith, Foreign Affairs, Nondelegation, and the Major Ques-
tions Doctrine, 172 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1743, 1789–1801 (2024).
The canon does not translate to those contexts because of the
nature of Presidential decisionmaking in response to ever-
changing national security threats and diplomatic challenges.
Moreover, in those areas, the President possesses at least
some independent constitutional power to act even without
congressional authorization—that is, in Youngstown cate-

Page Proof Pending Publication
gory 2.5
                               II
   Congressional delegations to independent agencies, as dis-
tinct from delegations to the President and executive agen-
cies, raise substantial Article II issues.
   Critiques of broad congressional delegations sometimes
focus on offcials described as “unaccountable bureaucrats.”
But that label does not squarely ft delegations to executive
agencies. In those circumstances, the President and his
subordinate executive offcials maintain control over the ex-
ecutive actions undertaken pursuant to a delegation. And
the President is elected by and accountable to all the Ameri-
can people. See Myers v. United States, 272 U. S. 52, 123
(1926).
   5
     The Youngstown category 2 situation is distinct from the far narrower
set of circumstances where a President can lawfully act even over a con-
gressional prohibition—that is, in Youngstown category 3. See Hamdan
v. Rumsfeld, 548 U. S. 557, 638–639 (2006) (Kennedy, J., concurring in
part); Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 637–638, 640–647 (Jackson, J., concurring).
708            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                    Kavanaugh, J., concurring

   Rather, the problems with delegations to “unaccountable”
offcials primarily arise from delegations to independent
agencies. Independent agencies are headed by offcers who
are not removable at will by the President and who thus
operate largely independent of Presidential supervision and
direction. Those independent agency heads are not elected
by the people and are not accountable to the people for their
policy decisions. Unlike executive agencies supervised and
directed by the President, independent agencies sit uncom-
fortably at the outer periphery of the Executive Branch.
Although this Court has thus far allowed such agencies in
certain circumstances, they belong to what has been aptly
labeled a “headless Fourth Branch.” Freytag v. Commis-
sioner, 501 U. S. 868, 921 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in part
and concurring in judgment) (quotation marks omitted); see
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U. S. 602, 628–
629 (1935); see also In re Aiken Cty., 645 F. 3d 428, 439–446
Page Proof Pending Publication
(CADC 2011) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring).
   This case involves a congressional delegation of authority
to the FCC. The FCC has commonly been viewed as an
independent agency headed by fve Commissioners. But at
oral argument in this case, the Government correctly pointed
out that the FCC formally is not an independent agency be-
cause “the FCC does not have statutory for-cause removal
protections”—in other words, no statutory text restricts the
President's authority to remove FCC Commissioners at will.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 54. And as the Government indicated, this
Court's usual practice, given the text and structure of Arti-
cle II, is not to infer for-cause removal protections from stat-
utory silence. See Kennedy v. Braidwood Management,
Inc., 606 U. S. 748, 770–772 (2025); Shurtleff v. United States,
189 U. S. 311, 314–315 (1903). For those reasons, I tend to
agree with the Government that the FCC, in light of the
statutory text, should not be considered an independent
agency.
                     Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            709

                    Kavanaugh, J., concurring

   If the FCC were an independent agency, however, then a
serious Article II delegation problem would arise, in my
view. When Congress delegates authority to the President
or an executive agency, the exercise of that delegated author-
ity is controlled by the President who was elected by and is
accountable to the people. See Myers, 272 U. S., at 123, 163–
164. But when Congress delegates authority to an inde-
pendent agency, no democratically elected offcial is account-
able. Whom do the people blame and hold responsible for a
bad decision or policy adopted by an independent agency?
Such a system of disembodied independent agencies with
enormous power over the American people and American
economy operates in substantial tension with the principle of
democratic accountability incorporated into the Constitu-
tion's text and structure, as well as historical practice and
foundational Article II precedents. “The Constitution re-
quires that a President chosen by the entire Nation oversee
Page Proof Pending Publication
the execution of the laws.” Free Enterprise Fund v. Public
Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. 477, 499
(2010); see Myers, 272 U. S., at 163–164; see also Morrison
v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654, 724–727 (1988) (Scalia, J., dissenting).
   There are at least two possible solutions to the problem
caused by congressional delegations of authority to inde-
pendent agencies. One is to overrule (or signifcantly nar-
row) Humphrey's Executor so that the heads of all or most
independent agencies are removable at will by the President,
and thus supervised and directed by the President. A sec-
ond option would be to apply a more stringent version of the
nondelegation doctrine to delegations to independent agen-
cies. For example, to take one possibility, independent
agencies might need to frst submit proposed rules to Con-
gress for approval in the legislative process before the rules
can take effect.
   I will not prolong the point here. Congressional delega-
tions of policymaking authority to independent agencies
710            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Jackson, J., concurring

raise signifcant Article II issues. In an appropriate case,
this Court should address that problem.

                         *     *      *
   As the Court explains, Congress has delegated authority
to the FCC with respect to the Universal Service Fund in
accordance with the longstanding intelligible principle test.
If the FCC were an independent agency, however, the ques-
tion would be more diffcult. Because that issue is not pre-
sented in this case, I join the Court's opinion in full.

  Justice Jackson, concurring.
   Respondents in this case have challenged the Federal
Communications Commission's universal-service program
under both the traditional nondelegation doctrine and the
private nondelegation doctrine. The Court properly rejects
both challenges today, and I join the Court's opinion in full.
Page Proof Pending Publication
I write separately to express my skepticism that the private
nondelegation doctrine—which purports to bar the Govern-
ment from delegating authority to private actors—is a viable
and independent doctrine in the frst place. Nothing in the
text of the Constitution appears to support a per se rule bar-
ring private delegations. And recent scholarship highlights
a similar lack of support for the doctrine in our history and
precedents. See, e. g., A. Volokh, The Myth of the Federal
Private Nondelegation Doctrine, 99 Notre Dame L. Rev.
203 (2023).
   In today's case, none of the parties addressed these con-
cerns, and the Court had no reason to consider them
sua sponte because respondents' private nondelegation claim
failed on its own terms. But we should tread carefully be-
fore entertaining challenges under this theory in the future.
“When the Constitution's text does not provide a limit to a
coordinate branch's power, we should not lightly assume that
Article III implicitly directs the Judiciary to fnd one.”
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Fi-
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             711

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

nancial Services Assn. of America, Ltd., 601 U. S. 416, 446
(2024) (Jackson, J., concurring).

  Justice Gorsuch, with whom Justice Thomas and Jus-
tice Alito join, dissenting.
   Within the federal government, Congress “alone has ac-
cess to the pockets of the people.” The Federalist No. 48,
p. 334 (J. Cooke ed. 1961) (J. Madison). The Constitution af-
fords only our elected representatives the power to decide
which taxes the government can collect and at what rates.
See Art. I, § 8, cl. 1. Throughout the Nation's history, Con-
gress has almost invariably respected this assignment. As
this Court observed some decades ago, it would represent “a
sharp break with our traditions” for Congress to abdicate its
responsibilities and “besto[w] on a federal agency the taxing
power.” National Cable Television Assn., Inc. v. United
States, 415 U. S. 336, 341 (1974).
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Today, the Court departs from these time-honored rules.
When it comes to “universal service” taxes, the Court con-
cludes, an executive agency may decide for itself what rates
to apply and how much to collect. In upholding that ar-
rangement, the Court defes the Constitution's command that
Congress “may not transfer to another branch `powers which
are strictly and exclusively legislative.' ” Gundy v. United
States, 588 U. S. 128, 135 (2019) (plurality opinion) (quoting
Wayman v. Southard, 10 Wheat. 1, 42–43 (1825)).
   Still, things could be worse. Because today's misadven-
ture “sits unmoored from surrounding law,” I have reason to
hope its approach will not stand the test of time. Loper
Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369, 425 (2024)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). And even as the Court swallows a delegation beyond
anything yet seen in the U. S. Reports, it also signals, unmis-
takably, that there are some abdications of congressional au-
thority, including in the very statute before us, that the pres-
ent majority isn't prepared to stomach.
712            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

                               I
  If you look closely at your phone bill, you will likely notice
a charge for “universal service.” Perhaps you have won-
dered what that is and why you are paying for it. As it
turns out, in 47 U. S. C. § 254, Congress has authorized the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to subsidize a
number of disparate programs under the umbrella of “uni-
versal service.” The FCC selects which programs to pursue
and how much they should cost. To fund them, the agency
taxes telecommunications companies at a rate it controls.
By regulation, those companies are then free to pass the
charges along to consumers like you. This case involves a
challenge to that scheme. To appreciate the questions it
poses for us, some background helps.

                               A
  The phrase “universal service” has carried different mean-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ings at different times. Originally, it referred to “a tele-
phone network that covers all of a country.” M. Mueller,
Universal Service: Competition, Interconnection, and Mo-
nopoly in the Making of the American Telephone System 1
(1997). And it meant one network in particular: the Bell
System owned by the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company (AT&T). AT&T's president coined the slogan in
1907—“One System, One Policy, Universal Service”—to
boost Bell's nascent monopoly. Id., at 4, 96. “Universal,”
as AT&T used it, focused less on telephone service for all
than on making sure AT&T provided all the service. And
the slogan proved apt: By the 1920s, the Bell System, fght-
ing “under the banner of universal service,” had conquered
the U. S. telephone market. Id., at 146.
  Over time, “the term `universal service' took on a new
meaning.” P. Huber, M. Kellogg, & J. Thorne, Federal Tele-
communications Law § 6.1.1.2 (3d ed. Supp. 2022) (Huber).
For much of the 20th century, it referred to a policy aimed
at making landline local phone service “available to all con-
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)            713

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

sumers at a reasonable cost.” Ibid. Even so, AT&T's mo-
nopoly remained at the heart of it all. As with other monop-
olistic public utilities, federal and state governments
regulated the rates the Bell System could charge. See Veri-
zon Communications Inc. v. FCC, 535 U. S. 467, 477 (2002).
And, for decades, that was the key to universal service: Reg-
ulators manipulated rates to expand Americans' access to
telephones. See Huber § 6.1.1.2. So, for example, “[l]ong-
distance rates were used to subsidize local rates, business
rates to subsidize residential rates, and urban rates to subsi-
dize rural rates.” Ibid.
   That system of implicit subsidies worked as long as the
same family of companies served all telephone customers.
See Verizon Communications, 535 U. S., at 480–481. But
the scheme began to falter in the 1970s and 1980s, as new
long-distance carriers entered the picture, and an antitrust
consent decree spun off AT&T's long-distance business into
Page Proof Pending Publication
a separate company, with newly independent “Baby Bells”
now providing local service. See NYNEX Corp. v. Discon,
Inc., 525 U. S. 128, 130–131 (1998); Bell Atlantic Corp. v.
Twombly, 550 U. S. 544, 549 (2007). At that point, regulators
could no longer depend on the Bell System to subsidize local
rates by infating long-distance rates. See Huber § 6.2.1.2.
   Still, parts of the old universal-service regime hung on.
Because the Baby Bells continued to enjoy regional monopo-
lies over local phone service, regulators could still rely on
them to provide some implicit subsidies, charging higher
rates to some customers while offering below-cost service to
others. See id., § 6.2.1. The FCC pitched in, too, by requir-
ing long-distance carriers to subsidize local providers, and by
establishing a “Lifeline” program to help low-income house-
holds afford local phone service. See Rural Telephone Co-
alition v. FCC, 838 F. 2d 1307, 1311–1312 (CADC 1988);
Huber § 6.2.2.3; ante, at 666.
   Eventually, however, Congress decided that universal
service had to be “ripped apart and rebuilt afresh.” Huber
714              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

§ 2.10. In the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 56,
Congress “fundamentally restructure[d]” the local telephone
market. AT&T Corp. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 525 U. S. 366,
371 (1999). No more, Congress declared, should the Baby
Bells enjoy regional monopolies over local phone service;
now, they must face competition, too. See ibid. To achieve
that objective, Congress required the Baby Bells to share
their networks with new entrants seeking to offer landline
local phone services. See Twombly, 550 U. S., at 549.1 But
Congress also recognized that its new approach would deal
“a fatal blow” to “the preexisting system of universal serv-
ice,” for there would no longer be monopolies whose rates
regulators could adjust to subsidize some customers at the
expense of others. R. Krotoszynski, Reconsidering the
Nondelegation Doctrine: Universal Service, the Power To
Tax, and the Ratifcation Doctrine, 80 Ind. L. J. 239, 282
(2005).

Page Proof Pending Publication
   So Congress had to reimagine “universal service” again.
In § 254 of the Telecommunications Act, Congress used the
term “universal service” for the frst time and invested it
with a new meaning. See Huber § 6.3. Gone was Bell's old
idea that universal service meant a single network of wires
covering the country. Gone, too, was the idea that the Bell
monopoly should subsidize basic telephone service by infat-
ing other customers' rates. Repurposing the slogan of uni-
versal service once more, Congress told the FCC to decide

   1
     That solution may seem quaint today, when three quarters of American
adults live in households without a landline telephone. See S. Blum-
berg & J. Luke, National Center for Health Statistics, Wireless Substitu-
tion 2 (June 2024). But in 1996, things looked different. Local phone
service depended on a network of copper wires connecting each home and
business. See Huber § 1.2.2. That network seemed impossible to dupli-
cate, and for decades, “local phone service was thought to be a natural
monopoly.” AT&T Corp. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 525 U. S. 366, 371 (1999).
Congress responded by requiring the Baby Bells to share their infrastruc-
ture with new rivals. See Huber § 1.11.2. As it turned out, of course,
cell phones soon became ubiquitous, and that web of copper became less
relevant. See id., § 10.1.
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                  715

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

for itself what the concept meant and to fund programs con-
sistent with its understanding. See § 254(c)(1). And to pay
for those programs, Congress authorized the agency to tax a
broad base of interstate “telecommunications carrier[s]” and
“provider[s].” § 254(d).
                              B
                                   1
   To understand how the scheme works, start with the pro-
grams the FCC may fund. Section 254 describes “universal
service” as “an evolving level of telecommunications serv-
ices” that the agency must both “preserve” and “advance.”
§§ 254(b)(5), (c)(1). To determine which specifc services to
fund and at what level, § 254(c)(1) directs the FCC to “con-
sider” four factors. Those factors look to “the extent to
which” a service (A) is “essential to education, public health,
or public safety,” (B) has “been subscribed to by a substantial

Page Proof Pending Publication
majority of residential customers,” (C) is “being deployed . . .
by telecommunications carriers,” and (D) is “consistent with
the public interest, convenience, and necessity.” §§ 254(c)
(1)(A)–(D).
   On top of those four factors, the statute supplies six fur-
ther “principles” in § 254(b). So, for instance, the agency
must “base” its funding decisions on the principles that
“[q]uality services should be available at just, reasonable,
and affordable rates,” § 254(b)(1), and that “[a]ccess to ad-
vanced telecommunications and information services should
be provided in all regions of the Nation,” § 254(b)(2). In ad-
dition, the FCC may adopt other new “principles” that it
“determine[s] ” to be “necessary and appropriate. ”
§ 254(b)(7). To date, the FCC has exercised that authority
twice. One new principle requires “competitive neutrality”
among providers and technologies,2 and the other encourages

   2
     “COMPETITIVE NEUTRALITY—Universal service support mecha-
nisms and rules should be competitively neutral. In this context, compet-
itive neutrality means that universal service support mechanisms and
rules neither unfairly advantage nor disadvantage one provider over an-
716              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

“support for advanced services” including “broadband
networks.” 3
   From this mash of four factors and six (now eight) princi-
ples, the FCC must discern which programs it wishes to fund
and to what degree. And it falls to the FCC to “ `balance' ”
these “factors” and “ `principles' ” “ `against one another
when they confict.' ” Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners
11–12 (quoting Qwest Corp. v. FCC, 258 F. 3d 1191, 1200
(CA10 2001)). So, for instance, if the FCC fnds that a par-
ticular service is “essential to education,” § 254(c)(1)(A), but
not “subscribed to by a substantial majority of residential
customers,” § 254(c)(1)(B), the agency must pick which part
of the statute prevails. As the FCC has long put it: “[A]ll
four criteria enumerated in section 254(c)(1) must be consid-
ered, but not each necessarily met.” In re Federal-State
Joint Bd. on Universal Serv., 12 FCC Rcd. 8776, 8809 (1997).
   Still, that is not quite the end of it. At least when it
Page Proof Pending Publication
comes to schools, libraries, and healthcare providers, two ad-
ditional provisions—§ 254(c)(3) and § 254(h)(2)—permit the
agency to pay for “advanced” and “additional” services that
go “above the baseline of what's been considered universal
service.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 42, 47. Consistent with these
provisions, the FCC has funded programs without regard to
whether they satisfy the four factors outlined in § 254(c)(1).
See 12 FCC Rcd., at 9008–9011.
   Over time, the services the agency has funded have
evolved considerably. So, for example, in 1996 the FCC de-
bated whether to subsidize “touch-tone service,” not just old

other, and neither unfairly favor nor disfavor one technology over an-
other.” In re Federal-State Joint Bd. on Universal Serv., 12 FCC Rcd.
8776, 8801 (1997).
   3
     In re Connect America Fund, 26 FCC Rcd. 17663, 17679 (2011); see
also ibid. (“ `Support for Advanced Services—Universal service support
should be directed where possible to networks that provide advanced serv-
ices, as well as voice services' ”).
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)           717

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

rotary phones. 61 Fed. Reg. 10503 (1996). (The answer:
Yes. 12 FCC Rcd., at 8809.) By 2011, the FCC “compre-
hensively reform[ed] and modernize[d]” its universal-service
goals to include expanding access to internet services nation-
wide. In re Connect America Fund, 26 FCC Rcd. 17663,
17667 (2011). More recently, the agency has announced that
the Universal Service Fund will help put Wi-Fi on school
buses. In re Modernizing the E-Rate Program for Schools
and Libraries, FCC No. 23–84 (2023) (declaratory ruling).

                                2
   Once the FCC decides which programs to support, it must
fgure out how to pay for them. On that score, § 254(d) of-
fers this instruction: “Every telecommunications carrier that
provides interstate telecommunications services shall con-
tribute, on an equitable and nondiscriminatory basis, to the
specifc, predictable, and suffcient mechanisms established
Page Proof Pending Publication
by the Commission to preserve and advance universal serv-
ice.” § 254(d); see § 254(b)(4). In addition to those “manda-
tory” contributions from common carriers, the statute also
grants the FCC “permissive” authority to compel contribu-
tions from “[a]ny other provider of interstate telecommunica-
tions,” including noncommon carriers, “if the public interest
so requires.” § 254(d); 12 FCC Rcd., at 9178. Essentially,
the agency must fgure out whom to tax and how much.
   Taking up the question whom to tax, the agency has said
that every telecommunications carrier must “contribute” a
share of its revenue from interstate and international tele-
communications services (think long-distance calls). 47
CFR § 54.706 (2024). But over time, the FCC has also ex-
panded the roster of companies who must contribute, so that
it now includes providers of prepaid calling cards and
internet-based calling. See 71 Fed. Reg. 38781, 43667
(2006). Currently, the FCC does not tax carriers' broad-
band revenues (think internet). But some have suggested
718           FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                    Gorsuch, J., dissenting

that, too, should change. See In re Report on the Future
of the Universal Serv. Fund, 37 FCC Rcd. 10041, 10088–
10094 (2022).
   After deciding whom to tax, the agency must determine
how much to collect from each carrier. For that, the FCC
relies on the Universal Service Administrative Company, a
Delaware not-for-proft corporation. Congress has not ex-
pressly authorized the FCC to outsource its responsibilities
under § 254. But in 1997, the FCC directed an association
of carriers to create the Administrative Company, and the
agency has assumed the task of defning that company's
structure and role. See Brief for Federal Petitioners 4; 47
CFR §§ 54.703, 54.705; ante, at 669–670. Among other
things, FCC regulations ensure that a supermajority of the
Administrative Company's board consists of directors who
represent industry insiders (like carriers) and groups that
beneft fnancially from universal-service programs (like li-
Page Proof Pending Publication
braries and schools). § 54.703(b)(1).
   How does the Administrative Company help calculate the
tax each carrier must pay? Each quarter, the company esti-
mates the upcoming expenses of the FCC's universal-service
programs. § 54.709(a)(3). Once the FCC approves that
fgure, the company next estimates carriers' total revenues
from interstate telecommunications, based on their self-
reported fgures. This is known as the “contribution base.”
Ibid. Finally, the FCC calculates the ratio of projected ex-
penses to the contribution base, which yields the “contribu-
tion factor,” or the percentage of its revenue each carrier
must pay. § 54.709(a)(2); ante, at 668–669.
   As the scope of the FCC's programs has expanded, so have
the taxes the agency collects to fund them. In 1998,
universal-service disbursements totaled about $2.29 billion.
Universal Service Administrative Co., 1999 Annual Report
2. In 2024, that fgure swelled to about $8.59 billion—nearly
double, adjusted for infation. Universal Service Adminis-
trative Co., 2024 Annual Report 4. To pay for that increase,
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    719

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

the “contribution factor” (or tax rate) has risen, too. In
1998, carriers paid less than 4% of their revenue from inter-
state and international telecommunications. 63 Fed. Reg.
35931 (1998). Today, that fgure is nearly 37%. FCC, Pub-
lic Notice, DA 25–223 (Mar. 13, 2025).4
   One might wonder why the Administrative Company, dom-
inated as it is by industry insiders, has allowed universal-
service contributions to grow so dramatically. FCC regula-
tions supply at least a partial explanation: “Federal universal
service contribution costs may be recovered . . . through a
line item on a customer's bill.” 47 CFR § 54.712(a). So, in
the end, it is consumers who pay for the agency's universal-
service programs.
                                II
                                    A
  In 2022, a carrier, a non-proft group, and several con-

Page Proof Pending Publication
sumers (collectively, respondents) challenged the present
universal-service scheme. Under the Constitution, they ob-
served, Congress must set the federal government's tax poli-

  4
    The skyrocketing contribution factor is attributable in part—but only
in part—to a shrinking contribution base. To fund its programs, remem-
ber, the FCC presently taxes revenue from interstate and international
telecommunications, such as long-distance calling. Over time, carrier rev-
enue from phone service has shrunk. As a result, tax rates must rise just
to keep receipts constant. But this is only a partial explanation for the
rising contribution factor. As we have seen, FCC receipts have done far
more than keep constant. Seeking to downplay the growth of the FCC's
programs, the Court fddles with the fgures. It suggests that we should
treat 1999, rather than 1998, as the baseline, “because in 1998, some of the
new statute's universal-service programs were just getting off the
ground.” Ante, at 686, 687, and n. 8. But I would have thought that's the
point. To assess whether the FCC's program contains anything resem-
bling a “cap” on total tax collections, as the Court maintains, surely it
helps to understand exactly how much the agency has grown that program
in the years since Congress acted. See ante, at 682–687. Really, using
1998 as the baseline spots the FCC a good bit of ramp-up time, too: After
all, Congress enacted the Telecommunications Act in 1996.
720               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

cies. And, they argued, § 254 offends that rule because it
allows the FCC and the Administrative Company to decide
how much tax to collect and at what rate. The Fifth Circuit
largely agreed with respondents' submissions. See 109
F. 4th 743 (2024) (en banc). The FCC, an association of car-
riers, and others (collectively, petitioners) then sought our
review.
   As the dispute comes to us, it presents three questions.
First, did Congress violate the Constitution by delegating to
the FCC the power to tax? Second, did the FCC violate the
Constitution by subdelegating some of its authority to the
private Administrative Company? And third, even if nei-
ther of those features independently offends the Constitu-
tion, does their combination? As I see it, this case begins
and ends with the frst question. Section 254 impermissibly
delegates Congress's taxing power to the FCC, and knowing
that is enough to know the Fifth Circuit's judgment should

Page Proof Pending Publication
be affrmed.5
   Even when it comes to that frst question, there is much
we need not address. Elsewhere, I have urged the Court
to reconsider its approach to assessing legislative delegations
in light of the Constitution's original meaning and historic
practice. See Gundy, 588 U. S., at 149 (dissenting opinion).
But respondents tell us we need not do so here. Instead,
they argue, § 254's delegation of authority to the FCC cannot
survive even the most forgiving standard this Court has de-
vised for analyzing delegations: The modern version of the
“intelligible principle” test. See Brief for Respondents 65–
66. So I will focus on that test, how it applies here, and why
§ 254 fails it.6

  5
     When granting certiorari, we also asked the parties to address whether
this dispute is moot. I agree with the Court that it is not. See ante, at
671–672, n. 1.
   6
     Before proceeding further, note some of the questions this case does
not present. First, while respondents argue that the FCC's subdelega-
tion to the Administrative Company offends the Constitution, they do not
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    721

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

  The Court and I approach our task from common ground.
As the Court acknowledges, the Constitution vests “[a]ll”
federal legislative power in Congress. Art. I, § 1; see ante,
at 672. Necessarily, that assignment means “no other”
branch of government may exercise legislative power.
Ante, at 672. To enforce that rule, this Court has developed
the “intelligible principle” test. Ante, at 673 (internal quo-
tation marks omitted); cf. J. W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United
States, 276 U. S. 394 (1928). All agree, too, that the test
must do something to stop Congress from giving the Presi-
dent or an executive agency a blank check to legislate.
See ibid.
  On top of all that, the Court and I agree that the intelligi-
ble principle test is not one size fts all. Ante, at 673. In-
stead, “contex[t]” matters. Ante, at 684. Among other
things, that means that the “ `degree of agency discretion
that is acceptable' ” depends on “ `the scope of the power con-

Page Proof Pending Publication
gressionally conferred.' ” Ante, at 673 (quoting Whitman v.
American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 475 (2001)).
So, for instance, Congress might permissibly give an agency
wide leeway in designing a tax stamp. See In re Kollock,
165 U. S. 526, 537 (1897). But Congress must give far more

press a statutory argument that the FCC lacks authority under § 254 to
pass some of its responsibilities on to a private corporation. See 109
F. 4th 743, 774–777, and n. 21 (CA5 2024) (en banc). Second, the Adminis-
trative Company's directors overwhelmingly represent entities with a f-
nancial stake in expanding universal service: those who beneft from
universal-service programs (like schools and hospitals) and those who get
paid to supply the benefts (the carriers). See Part I–B–2, supra. Some
amici suggest that seemingly conficted arrangement may offend the Fifth
Amendment's Due Process Clause. See, e. g., Brief for Reason Foundation
as Amicus Curiae 18–23. But neither the court of appeals nor respond-
ents took up that argument. See 109 F. 4th, at 768, n. 14. Third, one
might ask whether the Administrative Company's leaders qualify as off-
cers of the United States and, if so, whether their role complies with the
Appointments Clause, U. S. Const., Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. See Brief for Reason
Foundation as Amicus Curiae 13–18. But, again, neither the court of
appeals nor the parties addressed those questions.
722               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

detailed instructions if it wants an agency to regulate an
entire industry. See A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v.
United States, 295 U. S. 495, 541–542 (1935).

                                    B
   From that common ground, however, my path and the
Court's begin to diverge. I would start by examining the
nature of the power Congress assigned to the FCC. Under
§ 254, the FCC may compel carriers to “contribute” money
to support what everyone agrees is a government program.
See Wisconsin Bell, Inc. v. United States ex rel. Heath, 604
U. S. 140, 144 (2025). That is a quintessential tax—a “com-
pulsory contribution to the support of government.” 17 Ox-
ford English Dictionary 677 (2d ed. 1989) (defning “tax”).
Several FCC commissioners, including at least two FCC
chairmen, have seen it the same way, referring to universal-
service “contributions” as “taxes.” 7 So have academics and
Page Proof Pending Publication
other informed commentators.8 Before us, as well, the FCC
has said that it is “willing” to have this Court treat
universal-service contributions “as a tax.” Tr. of Oral Arg.
53. Really, if this compulsory contribution is not a tax,
“[w]hat else would you call it?” Bondi v. VanDerStok, 604
U. S. 458, 479 (2025).

  7
     See, e. g., B. Carr, Ending Big Tech's Free Ride, Newsweek, May 24,
2021, https://www.newsweek.com/ending-big-techs-free-ride-opinion-
1593696; In re Lifeline and Link Up Reform and Modernization, 31 FCC
Rcd. 3962, 4165 (2016) (Comm'r Pai, dissenting); In re Federal-State Joint
Bd. on Universal Serv., 13 FCC Rcd. 14915, 14980 (1998) (Comm'r
Furchtgott-Roth, dissenting).
   8
     See, e. g., S. Benjamin, B. Richman, & J. Speta, Internet and Telecom-
munications Regulation 225–226 (2d ed. 2023); T. Narechania & E. Stall-
man, Internet Federalism, 34 Harv. J. L. & Tech. 547, 612 (2021); W. Roger-
son, New Economic Perspectives on Telecommunications Regulation, 67
U. Chi. L. Rev. 1489, 1502–1503 (2000); G. Gekas & J. Harper, Annual Regu-
lation of Business Focus: Regulation of Electronic Commerce, 51 Admin.
L. Rev. 769, 782 (1999).
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             723

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

   Taxation ranks among the government's greatest powers.
Indeed, it is arguably the federal government's “most impor-
tant . . . authorit[y].” The Federalist No. 33, p. 205 (A. Ham-
ilton). As this Court has put it, the “power to tax is the one
great power upon which the whole national fabric is based.”
Nicol v. Ames, 173 U. S. 509, 515 (1899); see also McCulloch
v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 431 (1819) (“[T]he power to tax
involves the power to destroy”). Refecting as much, the
Constitution provides that all legislation “for raising Reve-
nue” must “originate in the House of Representatives,” the
only popularly elected chamber at the time of the Constitu-
tion's adoption. Art. I, § 7, cl. 1; see Amdt. 17. As the
framers saw it, “the Chamber that is more accountable to
the people should have the primary role in raising revenue.”
United States v. Munoz-Flores, 495 U. S. 385, 395 (1990).
   That context matters. To survive the intelligible princi-
ple test, a delegation involving such a signifcant power must
Page Proof Pending Publication
supply more signifcant limits on an agency's discretion than
when Congress confers some lesser authority. That is not to
say some “different and stricter” test applies when Congress
delegates the power to tax. See Skinner v. Mid-America
Pipeline Co., 490 U. S. 212, 222–223 (1989). It is instead to
recognize that what qualifes as an intelligible principle de-
pends on “context” and “the nature of the particular consti-
tutional powers” at issue. Lichter v. United States, 334
U. S. 742, 778 (1948).
   What exactly does the intelligible principle test require
in this context? Surely, history must count for something.
And it supplies at least one clear standard. As far as I can
tell, and as far as petitioners have informed us, this Court
has never approved legislation allowing an executive agency
to tax domestically unless Congress itself has prescribed the
tax rate. See, e. g., Michigan Central R. Co. v. Powers, 201
U. S. 245, 297 (1906) (suggesting that “a direct legislative de-
termination of the rate” avoids “abdication of the legislative
724                FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Gorsuch, J., dissenting

function”); 1 T. Cooley & C. Nichols, Law of Taxation 194
(4th ed. 1924) (Cooley & Nichols) (“The nondelegable powers
. . . include . . . the fxing of the rate of taxation”); J. Hines &
K. Logue, Delegating Tax, 114 Mich. L. Rev. 235, 239 (2015)
(Hines & Logue) (“[D]elegating some control over income tax
rates . . . would be unprecedented in U. S. history”); cf. Tr.
of Oral Arg. 39–40, 57, 78.9
    Applying that insight here poses petitioners with a serious
problem. “[A]ll agree” that Congress has not set the rate
at which the FCC may exact contributions. Ante, at 674.
Instead, § 254 delegates to the FCC the power to determine
which services to fund and thus the amount of money to col-
lect. See Part I–B–1, supra. To secure those funds, the
agency uses the Administrative Company to set a “contribu-
tion factor”—i. e., the percentage of its revenues a carrier
must pay. See Part I–B–2, supra. That's a tax rate. And,
remember, that rate has grown from less than 4% of carriers'

Page Proof Pending Publication
applicable revenues in 1998 to nearly 37% today—all based
on the agency's say-so and without any change to the statute.
Ibid. Nothing in the U. S. Reports suggests that an execu-
tive agency may exercise that kind of power over taxation.
    To be sure, petitioners identify an exception to the historic
rule that only Congress may set tax rates. Sometimes, they
point out, Congress has declined to supply a rate and instead
opted to cap the total sum the Executive may collect. See

  9
    The frst federal income tax statute, the Revenue Act of 1861, created
a fat tax of 3% on income exceeding $800. 12 Stat. 309. The frst income
tax created after the Sixteenth Amendment's ratifcation provided for pro-
gressive rates ranging from 1% to 7%. 38 Stat. 166. Income tax rates
have become more complicated over time, but Congress still sets them.
See, e. g., 26 U. S. C. § 1. The same pattern holds true for other kinds of
taxes. In 1791, for instance, the frst federal excise on distilled spirits set
rates to the penny. 1 Stat. 202–203. So do excise taxes today. See, e. g.,
§§ 4251(a)–(b) (imposing a 3% excise tax on local telephone service). In
some cases, Congress has set the tax as a dollar amount rather than a
percentage rate. See, e. g., § 4481(a) ($550 tax on the use of highway
motor vehicles with a gross weight over 75,000 pounds).
                        Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                     725

                          Gorsuch, J., dissenting

Brief for Petitioner SHLB Coalition et al. 38–39; Brief for
Respondents 33–36; Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners 6–7;
see Veazie Bank v. Fenno, 8 Wall. 533, 542 (1869). But none
of this solves petitioners' problem. For one thing, petition-
ers identify no example of a lump-sum delegation outside of
direct taxes on property—a unique context where the Con-
stitution's apportionment requirement makes it practically
impossible for Congress to set taxes by rate.10 For another,
and even setting aside that diffculty, the lump-sum exception
still would not save § 254. As the Court acknowledges, the
statute before us “contains no determinate cap.” Ante, at
674. Instead, the FCC gets to decide for itself how much to
collect—and, over time, has exercised that authority to dou-
ble that amount. See Part I–B, supra.

                                     III
   Having failed to identify a single example where this
Page Proof Pending Publication
Court has approved a tax delegation like this one, petitioners
and the Court propose a workaround. Yes, they concede,
§ 254 “imposes no quantitative . . . limits on how much money
  10
    Congress must apportion direct taxes among the States according to
population. Art. I, § 2, cl. 3; § 9, cl. 4. That requirement makes it diffcult
to set uniform tax rates across the Nation, since a State's share of the
national population rarely corresponds to its share of wealth. See Moore
v. United States, 602 U. S. 572, 582 (2024). But that challenge does not
extend to “indirect” taxes, such as the tax before us, which need not be
apportioned. See id., at 582–583. And because the Uniformity Clause,
Art. I, § 8, cl. 1, requires indirect taxes to apply “at the same rate” across
the country, United States v. Ptasynski, 462 U. S. 74, 84 (1983), it is not
clear that Congress could simply cap receipts from an indirect tax, without
also providing guidance to ensure it applies equally everywhere. That
uniformity requirement might explain why petitioners have identifed no
historical example, outside the direct tax arena, where Congress declined
to set a tax rate. Note, too, that even when Congress has employed a
lump-sum approach, it has usually supplied signifcant guidance in addition
to the cap. See N. Parrillo, A Critical Assessment of the Originalist Case
Against Administrative Regulatory Power, 130 Yale L. J. 1288, 1324, 1449–
1455 (2021).
726            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

the FCC can raise.” Ante, at 681. But, they contend, Con-
gress has provided guidance that amounts to a “qualitative”
cap. Ibid.; see, e. g., Brief for Federal Petitioners 29–30.
To support that claim, petitioners and the Court emphasize
that § 254(d) requires the FCC to collect taxes “suffcient . . .
to preserve and advance universal service.” The word “suf-
fcient,” they submit, “imposes an obligation” on the FCC “to
ensure that the [Universal Service] Fund is large enough,
but not too large, to achieve the statutory goals” Congress
supplied. Brief for Petitioner SHLB Coalition et al. 23.
And, they continue, Congress has laid out those goals in a
“detailed” way that “cabin[s] the FCC's exercise of delegated
authority.” Id., at i.
   Even taken on its own terms, I fnd that response unper-
suasive. For argument's sake, assume that, instead of fxing
the rate at which the FCC can tax, Congress may permissi-
bly impose a numerical limit on receipts. Assume, too, that
Page Proof Pending Publication
“qualitative” instructions may sometimes provide guidance
functionally equivalent to a numerical limit. Even then,
§ 254's “qualitative” instructions hardly measure up. Really,
the numbers speak for themselves. Recall that in 1998, the
FCC disbursed about $2.29 billion. Part I–B–2, supra. A
quarter century later, that fgure hit about $8.59 billion.
Ibid. Even adjusting those fgures for infation, the FCC
has nearly doubled the amount of tax it collects. Ibid. Far
from supplying “qualitative” directions akin to a numerical
cap, § 254 supplies little more than a blank check.
   Truth be told, the Court does not fnd its own response
entirely persuasive, either. It upholds the ability of the
FCC to tax and spend for universal-service programs under
§ 254(c)(1). See ante, at 682–687. But, recall, §§ 254(c)(3)
and (h)(2) also allow the FCC to support “advanced” and “ad-
ditional” services without regard to § 254(c)(1)'s factors. See
Part I–B–1, supra. And in a remarkable footnote, the Court
scruples to say those two provisions suffciently constrain the
agency's taxing power. See ante, at 687, n. 9. All the Court
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             727

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

is willing to defend, in other words, is whatever level of taxa-
tion suffces to support universal service as defned under
§ 254(c)(1), and no more. Consider each of these moves in
turn.
                                A
   Start with the parts of § 254 the Court does defend—the
programs the FCC supports pursuant to § 254(c)(1). To-
gether with § 254(d), that provision merely tells the FCC to
tax carriers in an amount “suffcient” to “preserve and ad-
vance universal service.” To my eyes, it's hard to see how
that direction might be fairly analogized to a numerical cap.
The statute, remember, does not say what “universal serv-
ice” is, and the phrase bears no established meaning. To be
sure, I have a good sense of what “universal service” meant
when the Bell System used it to protect its monopoly. See
Part I–A, supra. I have an idea, too, of what the phrase
came to mean later, as a shorthand for the practice of regu-
Page Proof Pending Publication
lating rates so most Americans could afford basic phone serv-
ice. See ibid. But, as we have seen, the 1996 Act “ripped
apart” the old notion of universal service. Huber § 2.10.
Going forward, Congress declared, the meaning of universal
service would “evolv[e].” § 254(c)(1). In what directions?
Congress left that for the FCC to work out.
   Of course, the statute proceeds to offer some direction to
the agency about what qualifes as “universal service,” and
thus how much it can tax and spend. But, even viewed
charitably, that guidance can hardly be described as the func-
tional equivalent of a numerical cap. Just recall what the
statute actually says. It instructs the FCC to discern the
“evolving” meaning of “universal service” from the primor-
dial soup of four factors found in § 254(c)(1), as supplemented
by six principles discussed in §§ 254(b)(1)–(6), as well as
whatever further principles (two and counting) the agency
chooses to devise under § 254(b)(7). See Part I–B–1, supra.
Many of these factors and principles address competing
goods, and any effort to weigh them all can yield no more
728            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

certainty than asking “ `whether a particular line is longer
than a particular rock is heavy.' ” National Pork Producers
Council v. Ross, 598 U. S. 356, 381 (2023) (plurality opinion).
Recognizing as much, the FCC acknowledges that it falls to
the agency to decide how best to proceed (and therefore how
much to tax) when the statute's abundance of factors and
principles “confict.” Brief for Federal Petitioners 31 (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). In no way can this “preface
of generalities as to permissible aims” be fairly compared to
a frm cap. Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 537.
   Experience proves the point. In 1996, recall, the hot de-
bate was whether to subsidize “touch-tone service.” 61 Fed.
Reg. 10503. But in 2011, the FCC steered the Universal
Service Fund away from simply making basic telephone
service available and toward expanding access to “broad-
band, both fxed and mobile.” 26 FCC Rcd., at 17670. By
2019, the FCC's Connect America Fund was spending nearly
Page Proof Pending Publication
$5 billion annually on high-speed internet services for rural
or remote “areas that are costly to serve.” GAO, A. Von
Ah, Telecommunications, FCC Should Enhance Performance
Goals and Measures for Its Program To Support Broadband
Service in High-Cost Areas 1 (GAO–21–24, Oct. 2020). And
why stop there? Nothing, it seems, would prevent the FCC
from choosing to tax and spend to provide a mobile satellite
internet device (like Starlink) to everyone who owns a busi-
ness, home, or hunting cabin in rural America. Cf. In re
Application for Review of Starlink Servs., LLC, 38 FCC
Rcd. 12201, 12205–12206 (2023) (revoking a previous $885
million award to Starlink).
   Searching for some way (any way) to support the notion that
§ 254(c)(1) contains a “qualitative” cap on how much the FCC
can tax and spend, the Court eventually resorts to rewriting
the statute. Now, it says, the FCC can fund a service only if
it meets all of subsection (c)(1)'s four factors. Ante, at 684–
685, 688–689. So, the Court stresses, subsection (c)(1)(B)
asks whether a particular service “has `been subscribed to
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   729

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

by a substantial majority of residential customers.' ” Ante, at
684. As a result, the Court reasons, the FCC cannot fund any
service unless most Americans already have it. Ibid. Like-
wise, the Court asserts, § 254(b)'s instruction that the FCC
“shall base” its funding decisions on the principles discussed
there means that the FCC “must” satisfy all of those principles
before funding any program. See ante, at 684–685, 687–688.
   It's a nice theory. But it bears no resemblance to the law
Congress adopted. By its terms, § 254(c)(1) requires the
FCC only to “consider the extent to which” each factor ap-
plies. The statute nowhere says each (or any) of those crite-
ria “has to be met” before the agency can fund a particular
service. Ante, at 688. In fact, the FCC has long and con-
sistently understood the statute to mean the opposite: “[A]ll
four criteria enumerated in section 254(c)(1) must be consid-
ered, but not each necessarily met.” 12 FCC Rcd., at 8809
(emphasis added).11
Page Proof Pending Publication
   The same goes for subsection (b). It says that the FCC
“shall base” funding decisions on various “principles.” But
each of those principles is framed as a “should,” not a “must.”
So, for example, subsection (b)(1) provides that the FCC
“should” make “[q]uality services . . . available at . . . afford-
able rates.” And subsection (b)(2) says that the FCC
“should” ensure “[a]ccess to advanced . . . services” is “pro-
vided in all regions of the Nation.” In this context, “[t]he
term `should' indicates a recommended course of action, but
does not itself imply the obligation associated with `shall.' ”
Qwest Corp., 258 F. 3d, at 1200. Refecting that understand-

  11
     That statement refects the FCC's consistent reading of the statute
over nearly two decades. See, e. g., FCC, Public Notice, Rural Digital
Opportunity Fund Phase I Auction, 35 FCC Rcd. 6077, 6121, and n. 278
(2020); In re Uniendo a Puerto Rico Fund and Connect USVI Fund, 34
FCC Rcd. 9109, 9184–9185, and n. 523 (2019); In re Connect America
Fund, 32 FCC Rcd. 1624, 1631 (2017); In re Requests for Waiver of Deci-
sions, 31 FCC Rcd. 7731, 7734, n. 22 (2016); In re Federal-State Joint Bd.
on Universal Serv., 18 FCC Rcd. 15090, 15091 (2003).
730               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Gorsuch, J., dissenting

ing, the FCC has long read § 254(b) as requiring it to consult
all of that provision's various principles, but not as “impos-
[ing] infexible requirements” on universal-service programs.
Connect America Fund Phase II Auction, 33 FCC Rcd.
1428, 1468, n. 229 (2018). Instead, each provision supplies
“ `only a principle, not a statutory command,' ” which the
agency may “ `ignore' ” in service of other principles found
in the statute. Rural Digital Opportunity Fund Phase I
Auction, 35 FCC Rcd. 6077, 6119, n. 262 (2020) (quoting
Alenco Communications, Inc. v. FCC, 201 F. 3d 608, 621
(CA5 2000)); see also In re Lifeline & Link Up Reform &
Modernization, 27 FCC Rcd. 6656, 6759, n. 636 (2012); Rural
Cellular Assn. v. FCC, 588 F. 3d 1095, 1103 (CADC 2009).12
   In its zeal to save subsection (c)(1) programs (why else
ignore what the statute actually says?), the Court throws all
that aside and seizes the drafting pen. So the meaning of
“universal service” evolves once more. Only now, it is the

Page
  12
     The CourtProof         Pending
                suggests that,                    Publication
                               at oral argument, the government endorsed
its novel reading of subsections (b) and (c). Ante, at 688–689. But what
does that prove? Courts must exercise independent judgment when in-
terpreting the law. Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369,
394 (2024). Traditionally, too, this Court has accorded special respect not
to advocacy from the podium, but to a coordinate branch's “consistent”
and “contemporaneous construction” of a law. See id., at 386; id., at 430
(Gorsuch, J., concurring). And here, the FCC's historic understanding
of § 254 is the only one the statute's language tolerates. Notably, too, the
government's arguments before us ran both ways. See, e. g., Reply Brief
for Federal Petitioners 11 (“The word `should' [in § 254(b)] allows the FCC
to balance the principles against one another when they confict” (internal
quotation marks omitted)); id., at 12 (“The FCC [has] argued that it need
not implement a particular principle in light of other valid statutory objec-
tives. . . . That comports with the government's position here” (emphasis
deleted; alteration and internal quotation marks omitted)). Nor can I dis-
cern any sensible reason why we should prefer one strand of the govern-
ment's present (inconsistent) submissions over the FCC's longstanding
(consistent) views that honor the statute's actual terms. “[W]hen the
government (or any litigant) speaks out of both sides of its mouth, no one
should be surprised if its latest utterance isn't the most convincing one.”
Bittner v. United States, 598 U. S. 85, 97–98, n. 5 (2023).
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   731

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

Court's creation through and through. And if that were not
bad enough, the Court's late-night rewrite hardly helps its
cause. Even as revised, the statute still falls well short of
imposing anything like a numerical cap on how much the
FCC can tax and spend. Suppose tomorrow the agency de-
cides to ensure “every American [has] a cell phone and a cell
phone plan.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 62–63. Could anyone com-
plain that “a substantial majority of residential customers”
do not use cell phones? § 254(c)(1)(B). I doubt it.
   Not only does the Court's new statute fail to deliver on its
only assignment, it promises to backfre, too. Rather than
preserve the status quo, as the Court so clearly desires, its
revisions threaten to render existing programs illegal—all
while leaving the FCC (and program benefciaries) guessing
about the implications for future initiatives. Take an exam-
ple. Back in 2017, the FCC launched a multibillion-dollar
effort to promote “broadband service in unserved high-cost

Page Proof Pending Publication
areas.” In re Connect America Fund, 32 FCC Rcd. 1624
(2017). Among other things, the program subsidizes certain
high-speed services that, the FCC has acknowledged, are not
yet embraced by “a substantial majority of residential cus-
tomers.” Id., at 1631 (internal quotation marks omitted).
If we had simply confessed the obvious—that this statute is
unconstitutional—Congress could have responded easily
with the simple addition of a rate or, perhaps, a cap. But
now? Now, the FCC can fund a program only if it satisfes
all subsection (b) principles and all subsection (c) factors—a
novel requirement that calls existing programs into question
and promises profound implications for future ones as well.
Far from avoiding any short-term disruption, the Court's
new statute promises plenty of chaos of its own.13

  13
     By interpreting “shall consider the extent to which,” § 254(c)(1), to
mean “shall ensure that,” the Court threatens chaos well beyond universal
service, too. “As a general rule,” courts have long thought that “when a
statute requires an agency to `consider' a factor, the agency must reach
an express and considered conclusion about the bearing of the factor, but
732               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

                                    B
   So much for the Court's renovation of § 254(c)(1). Now
consider the two provisions the Court cannot bring itself to
defend. Sections 254(c)(3) and (h)(2), recall, permit the FCC
to fund “additional” and “advanced” services for “schools, li-
braries, and health care providers.” See Part I–B–1, supra.
Even the Court is unwilling to say that these provisions im-
pose a “qualitative” cap—and understandably so. When it
comes to deciding what programs to fund under § 254(c)(3)
and § 254(h)(2), the FCC is unconstrained by any of the sub-
section (c)(1) factors the Court rewrites and leans on so heav-
ily today. See In re Federal-State Joint Bd. on Universal
Serv., 12 FCC Rcd., at 9008–9011; Tr. of Oral Arg. 42, 47.
Subsection (c)(3) makes that explicit: The FCC may desig-
nate services for support under that provision “[i]n addition
to the services included in the defnition of universal service
under paragraph (1).”
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Here, too, experience illustrates just how uncapped the
FCC's § 254(c)(3) and § 254(h)(2) programs really are. For
some years, the FCC has relied on those provisions to fund
internet access at schools and libraries. 89 Fed. Reg. 67304–
67305 (2024). But, in 2024, the FCC announced that it would
also begin funding “Wi-Fi hotspots and services to be used
off-premises by students, school staff, and library patrons.”
Id., at 67304, 67318. As far as the FCC sees it, subsections
(c)(3) and (h)(2) might allow it to collect enough taxes to sup-
need not give any specifc weight” to it. Central Vermont R., Inc. v. ICC,
711 F. 2d 331, 336 (CADC 1983) (internal quotation marks and alteration
omitted); see Covad Communications Co. v. FCC, 450 F. 3d 528, 539
(CADC 2006) (“[W]hen the [FCC] is obligated to consider certain factors,
that means only that the FCC must reach an express and considered con-
clusion about the bearing of a factor, but is not required to give any spe-
cifc weight to it” (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted)).
Does all that case law now get thrown out the window? Has the Court
transformed every instruction to “consider” some criterion into a mandate
the agency must satisfy? What a gift to regulated industries, or at least
to their lawyers.
                    Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             733

                      Gorsuch, J., dissenting

ply take-home hotspots to anyone with a library card. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 43–44. Or maybe even take-home Starlink
devices for library patrons nationwide, to help shrink the
“digital divide between [Americans] with access to broad-
band at home and those without.” In re Addressing the
Homework Gap Through the E-Rate Program, FCC No. 24–
76, p. 12 (2024).
   Rather than address the constitutionality of the FCC's
power to tax and spend for § 254(c)(3) and § 254(h)(2) pro-
grams, the Court dodges the question. Buried in a footnote
midway through its opinion, it offers this: “We have no
occasion to address any nondelegation issues raised by
Sections 254(c)(3) and (h)(2),” the Court says, because while
respondents challenged “the contribution scheme generally,”
they did not name those provisions “in particular.” Ante, at
687, n. 9.
   It is a perplexing maneuver, and I suspect the parties will

Page Proof Pending Publication
fnd it quite the surprise. Not one of them suggested cleav-
ing off portions of the statute in this way. Still, the Court's
late-breaking move is, in one sense, to its credit. Though it
is unwilling to say aloud that any part of § 254 fails the intel-
ligible principle test, neither can the Court bring itself to
bless such a lavish delegation of taxing authority. As a re-
sult, respondents remain free on remand, or in a future pro-
ceeding, to renew their attack on the constitutionality of
whatever contributions the FCC demands for its subsection
(c)(3) and (h)(2) programs. And that in itself is a notable
development: Today marks the frst time in a long time that
the Court has confronted a statutory delegation and found
no way to save it.
                              IV
   Return, now, to the portion of § 254 the Court is willing to
defend—the programs the FCC supports pursuant to subsec-
tion (c)(1). No one disputes that part of the statute lacks a
tax rate or a numerical cap. And rewritten or not, that pro-
vision lacks anything approaching a “qualitative” cap as well.
734            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

Faced with these diffculties, in the end petitioners and the
Court resort to changing the conversation. Now, they say,
look to other felds. The Court has allowed agencies “to
raise revenue” through fees “without specifying a numeric
cap or . . . rate.” Ante, at 675. The Court has allowed
agencies to set “ `just and reasonable' rates” and to regulate
in the “ `public interest.' ” Ante, at 683–684. And, petition-
ers and the Court reason, if those delegations are permissi-
ble, this one must be, too. Ibid.; Brief for Federal Petition-
ers 11. Failing all else, petitioners and the Court add that
they see no practical value in requiring Congress to speak
more clearly about the scope of permissible universal-service
taxes. Ante, at 679–680; Tr. of Oral Arg. 8–9.
   But the Court's comparisons disregard its own insight that
context matters in applying the intelligible principle test.
Ante, at 673, 684. Nor, in my view, is it any answer to say
that legislation supplying a rate or real cap might still leave

Page Proof Pending Publication
the FCC with some measure of discretion. Though the Con-
stitution does not require Congress to make every decision,
there are some choices that belong to Congress alone—
including setting a tax's rate or, at least, capping receipts.

                               A
   Start with the Court's assertion that “Congress has often
enacted statutes empowering agencies to raise revenue with-
out specifying a numeric cap or tax rate.” Ante, at 675. To
sustain that point, the Court relies on a list of nine examples
offered by the government. Ibid. (citing Reply Brief for
Federal Petitioners 7–9). The private petitioners highlight
the same provisions, which, it seems, provide “the best prec-
edents” for § 254. Tr. of Oral Arg. 82–84; see id., at 8, 31,
37–38.
   Those provisions all have something in common: Each de-
scribes a fee. And that makes them poor benchmarks for a
tax delegation. Fees, by defnition, are payments made in
“compensation for a service provided to, or alternatively
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)           735

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

compensation for a cost imposed by, the person charged the
fee.” Mueller v. Raemisch, 740 F. 3d 1128, 1133 (CA7 2014);
accord, Pace v. Burgess, 92 U. S. 372, 375–376 (1876). For
that reason, fees carry a built-in intelligible principle: The
government cannot collect more money than it needs to off-
set a real-world cost or beneft. See National Cable Televi-
sion Assn., 415 U. S., at 341–342.
   Consider one of the government's examples, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). See ante, at 678.
The FDIC fnances its Deposit Insurance Fund through “[i]n-
surance fees” paid by FDIC-insured banks. 12 U. S. C.
§ 1815(d). By statute, the fee each bank pays must be
“keyed to the risk of the bank's insolvency.” M. Ricks,
Money as Infrastructure, 2018 Colum. Bus. L. Rev. 757, 803
(citing § 1817(b)). In other words, the fees offset a cost the
banks impose on the FDIC—namely, their risk of failure,
which the FDIC's insurance must underwrite. That need
Page Proof Pending Publication
to compensate for a particular cost provides an intelligible
principle cabining the FDIC's discretion and limiting the fees
it can charge to what the agency needs to cover insurance
payouts. See id., at 803–804.
   A similar principle explains the fee-setting authority of
federal courts. See Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners 8.
By statute, courts of appeals may charge “fees” in amounts
“prescribed from time to time by the Judicial Conference of
the United States.” 28 U. S. C. § 1913. As the Judicial Con-
ference has recognized, that provision authorizes courts to
“charg[e] for services provided,” such as docketing an appeal
or admitting an attorney to practice. Report of the Pro-
ceedings of the Judicial Conference of the United States 12,
14 (Sept. 16, 2008). So here, too, fee levels refect a cost
imposed or a beneft received by the payor.
   Take one more example from the government's brief. See
Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners 8–9. Congress has au-
thorized the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service to
charge fees “suffcient” “to cover the cost of providing ag-
736               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

ricultural . . . inspection” for certain “commercial aircraft.”
21 U. S. C. § 136a(a)(1)(A). That provision might sound
broad because it lacks a numerical limit. In context, though,
it leaves little for the agency to do except arithmetic: To set
the fee, it “divid[es] the total costs of inspecting Commercial
Aircraft by the total number of Commercial Aircraft.” Air
Transp. Assn. of Am., Inc. v. United States Dept. of Agricul-
ture, 37 F. 4th 667, 675 (CADC 2022).14
   Petitioners and the Court would set all that to the side.
In their telling, this Court's decision in Skinner “rendered
irrelevant” the question whether a particular exaction in-
volves a tax or a fee. Ante, at 677 (citing 490 U. S., at 223).
Not so. Skinner, to be sure, indicated that the intelligible
principle test applies to tax delegations. Id., at 223. And
under that test, Skinner presented an easy case. The stat-
ute at issue there told the government (numerically) how
much money it could raise. Id., at 219–220 (“the ceiling on
Page Proof Pending Publication
aggregate fees . . . is set at 105 percent of the aggregate
appropriations made by Congress for that fscal year”). In
light of that and other instructions, the Court held, the stat-
ute provided an intelligible principle regardless of whether
it imposed a tax or a fee. Id., at 220–223. That is all the

  14
     The Court discusses two other examples from “the sphere of fnancial
regulation.” Ante, at 675. Both follow a by-now familiar pattern. Con-
gress has authorized the Offce of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
to fund its operations by “collect[ing] an assessment, fee, or other charge”
from the banks it supervises. 12 U. S. C. § 16. While these fees are not
assessed in exchange for specifc transactions, they offset the costs the
OCC incurs in fulflling its statutory mandate to supervise, regulate, and
charter national banks. See §§ 1, 21, 24. Funding for the Federal Re-
serve Board refects a similar dynamic. The Board may levy upon Fed-
eral Reserve Banks “an assessment suffcient to pay its estimated ex-
penses . . . for the half year succeeding the levying of such assessment.”
§ 243. Again, such fees offset the Federal Reserve Board's regulatory
costs. Cf. Trump v. Wilcox, 605 U. S. –––, ––– (2025) (noting the histori-
cally exceptional structure of the Federal Reserve).
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                    737

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

decision held. It certainly did not invite courts to ignore
relevant context or disregard the basic distinction between
fees (which incorporate an intelligible principle by nature)
and taxes (which do not).15
   Perhaps sensing as much, the Court ultimately retreats
from precedent into pragmatism. Trying to distinguish
taxes from fees, it contends, would risk plunging the Court
into “a morass.” Ante, at 677. But the job is hardly some
feat ft for Hercules alone. Courts must, and do, routinely
distinguish between taxes and fees in many contexts. See,
e. g., United States v. United States Shoe Corp., 523 U. S. 360,
366–370 (1998) (distinguishing between fees and taxes for
purposes of the Export Clause, U. S. Const., Art. I, § 9, cl. 5).
   Besides, any morass here is of the Court's own making.
In its view, the tax/fee distinction depends on whether the
   15
      The Court charges me with downplaying J. W. Hampton. Ante, at

Page Proof Pending Publication
675, n. 3. But I do not see how casting a spotlight on that decision im-
proves the picture for the Court. To start, J. W. Hampton involved a
tariff, which arguably raises distinct nondelegation questions from domes-
tic taxes. See J. W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U. S. 394,
400 (1928); n. 19, infra. Even setting that complication aside, the statute
in question imposed a tariff on barium dioxide at four cents per pound—
and thus employed a straightforward tax rate. 42 Stat. 860. After set-
ting the rate, Congress then authorized the President to adjust it by up
to 50%, as needed to “ `equalize . . . differences in costs of production' ”
between the United States and “ `competing foreign countries.' ” J. W.
Hampton, 276 U. S., at 401 (quoting 42 Stat. 941). In other words, the
statutory rate could move only within numerically defned bounds and
only if the President found specifc facts. That is what suffced to provide
an “intelligible principle” when the Court frst used the phrase. And no-
body could compare that arrangement to § 254's open-ended tax-and-spend
scheme. See Gundy v. United States, 588 U. S. 128, 158–159 (2019) (Gor-
such, J., dissenting) (observing the traditional rule that Congress may
make the effect of statutes conditional on facts found by the Executive).
If lining this case up against J. W. Hampton proves anything, it is only
that the phrase “intelligible principle” has taken on an entirely different
meaning than it once held. See Gundy, 588 U. S., at 163–166 (Gorsuch,
J., dissenting).
738              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

charge “is for a `beneft' granted to the payor that is `not
shared by other members of society.' ” Ante, at 678 (quoting
National Cable Television Assn., 415 U. S., at 341). But
that formulation is not the usual one. In defning fees, the
typical question is whether the fee compensates for a beneft
or cost that sets the payor apart. See, e. g., United States
v. Sperry Corp., 493 U. S. 52, 60–61 (1989); Massachusetts v.
United States, 435 U. S. 444, 462–463, and n. 19 (1978); Pace,
92 U. S., at 375–376; Mueller, 740 F. 3d, at 1133; Hines &
Logue 257, n. 107; GAO, S. Irving, Federal User Fees: A
Design Guide 4, n. 4 (GAO–08–386SP, May 2008); 1 Cooley &
Nichols 97–98, 109–110.16 Think back to the FDIC. The
public undoubtedly benefts from the fees banks pay for de-
posit insurance; we all enjoy a safer banking system. But
banks impose a cost on the FDIC (their risk of failure) that
distinguishes them from the general public. Insurance fees
compensate for that special cost. That is why they are fees,

Page Proof Pending Publication
not taxes.
   Once we understand fees correctly, the category plainly
includes all the government's examples and excludes § 254
contributions. When carriers pay into the Universal Serv-
ice Fund, they do not gain any special beneft, such as per-
mission “to practice law or medicine or construct a house or
run a broadcast station.” National Cable Television Assn.,
415 U. S., at 340. (A different provision, 47 U. S. C. § 158, au-
thorizes “application fees.”) Nor do § 254 contributions off-
set some regulatory cost that carriers impose on the FCC or
on society. (That falls to “regulatory fees” the FCC collects
under § 159.) Instead, § 254 takes money from some (carri-
ers) and gives it to others (libraries, schools, and the like).
See In re Incomnet, Inc., 463 F. 3d 1064, 1066–1067 (CA9
2006). In short: Section 254 creates a classic tax-and-spend
  16
     In National Cable Television Assn., the Court focused only on the
benefts side of the formulation because that suffced to make sense of the
statute before it. See 415 U. S., at 342–343 (“The phrase `value to the
recipient' is, we believe, the measure of the authorized fee”).
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                   739

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

scheme, not a fee. Even the FCC does not dispute the point.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 53; see Part II–A, supra.17

                                    B
   Beyond fees, petitioners and the Court offer a second rea-
son to ignore the fact that § 254(c)(1) programs can be funded
through taxes without a rate or fxed cap. After all, they
observe, this Court has rejected nondelegation attacks on
“authorizations to regulate in the `public interest' and to set
`just and reasonable' rates.” Ante, at 684 (quoting National
Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 319 U. S. 190, 225–226
(1943), and FPC v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320 U. S. 591, 600
(1944)). And, set next to those vague standards, petitioners
and the Court suggest, § 254 offers “clear and limiting” guid-
ance. Ante, at 691.
   This argument neglects the Court's own admonition that
the intelligible principle test is context dependent. See
Page Proof Pending Publication
ante, at 673, 684. It begins by asking “what instructions”
the statute in question provides to constrain an agency's dis-
cretion. Gundy, 588 U. S., at 136 (plurality opinion). An-
swering that question is a matter of statutory interpretation.
Ibid. And “[i]t is a fundamental canon of statutory con-
struction that the words of a statute must be read in their
context,” West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U. S. 697, 721 (2022)
  17
     The Court never denies that universal-service “contributions” are
taxes, but suggests in a footnote that they are not so different from FDIC
fees because carriers enjoy a “special beneft” from them. See ante, at
679, n. 6. I do not see it. The FDIC program is an insurance plan that
charges fees (premiums) in return for a service (payouts in the event of
default). Universal-service contributions are nothing like that. To be
sure, the FCC pays some carriers—and other vendors—to help it imple-
ment universal-service programs. But those are payments for services
rendered, not a “special beneft” given in proportion to a fee payment, as
with a broadcast license or FDIC insurance. Often, in fact, carriers that
“contribute large sums” to the Universal Service Fund receive few
universal-service payments, while those that “contribute little” end up re-
ceiving large ones. App. 98.
740              FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

(internal quotation marks omitted), because language used
in one setting may carry a meaning it does not have in oth-
ers, see Yates v. United States, 574 U. S. 528, 537 (2015) (plu-
rality opinion). So even if a particular statutory term
evokes “well-known and generally acceptable standards” in
one domain, that does not mean the same term will necessar-
ily supply similar guidance when used in other “uncharted
felds.” Fahey v. Mallonee, 332 U. S. 245, 250 (1947); see
also Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 534 (new context may
give terms “a much broader range and a new signifcance”).
   This Court has recognized this point many times, including
when it comes to phrases like “public interest.” So, for ex-
ample, the Court has held that phrase may contain enough
“concrete” meaning to survive the intelligible principle test
in the “context” of broadcast licensing, where the govern-
ment has to allocate a limited spectrum of publicly owned
airwaves. National Broadcasting Co., 319 U. S., at 216, 226

Page Proof Pending Publication
(internal quotation marks omitted); see M. McConnell, The
President Who Would Not Be King 334 (2020) (McConnell).
But, the Court has also found, the same “public interest”
criterion offers inadequate guidance to the FCC when it
comes to raising revenue. National Cable Television Assn.,
415 U. S., at 341.
   The same goes for the phrase “ `just and reasonable.' ”
Ante, at 684. This Court has sometimes found that phrase
satisfes the intelligible principle test when it comes to set-
ting rates for regulated monopolies like public utilities—a
context where it incorporates “concepts with a long history
at common law.” H. Friendly, The Federal Administrative
Agencies: The Need for Better Defnition of Standards, 75
Harv. L. Rev. 863, 873, n. 53 (1962); see, e. g., ICC v. Cincin-
nati, N. O. & T. P. R. Co., 167 U. S. 479, 501 (1897).18 Accord-
  18
     As a rule, the “just and reasonable” standard requires agencies to
balance “the investor and the consumer interests,” FPC v. Hope Natural
Gas Co., 320 U. S. 591, 603 (1944), in order to approximate the “bounds
that would be drawn by market forces in a non-monopolistic market,” Jer-
                    Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             741

                      Gorsuch, J., dissenting

ingly, in that sphere, the “traditional regulatory notion of
the `just and reasonable' rate” may mean something. Veri-
zon, 535 U. S., at 481. But outside that sphere, the same
phrase may amount to little more than an instruction to go
forth and do good. See Schechter Poultry, 295 U. S., at 539–
540; G. Lawson, Delegation and Original Meaning, 88 Va.
L. Rev. 327, 386 (2002).
   Here's the point: Just because a phrase carries a well-
understood historic meaning in one context does not mean
the same phrase “ `in the abstract' ” will suffce in every other
setting to satisfy the intelligible principle test. Reply Brief
for Federal Petitioners 3. So the fact that petitioners and
the Court can point to past decisions approving the use of a
broad phrase in a different domain proves nothing. Instead,
it falls to petitioners and the Court to show that the statu-
tory terms presently before us, properly understood in their
particular context, do in fact provide signifcant constraints
Page Proof Pending Publication
on the FCC as it exercises a signifcant power.
   That is a burden petitioners and the Court have not car-
ried and cannot carry. When § 254(c)(1) speaks of “universal
service,” it does not invoke “ `concepts with a long history at
common law.' ” Supra, at 740. To the contrary, everyone
agrees that § 254 “ripped apart” the old understanding of
“universal service” and cleared the ground for a new one.
Huber § 2.10; see Part I–A, supra; Brief for Federal Petition-
ers 3; Brief for Petitioner SHLB Coalition et al. 3. Worse,
even if one term or another in § 254(c)(1) or §§ 254(b)(1)–(7)
might claim some meaning-giving ancestry, the statute's mix
of four factors and six (or more) principles lacks any such
pedigree. Whether those factors and principles need only
be considered, as the statute says, or whether they must al-
ways be met, as the Court now suggests, the FCC truly must
blaze its own trail.

sey Central Power & Light Co. v. FERC, 810 F. 2d 1168, 1190 (CADC
1987) (Starr, J., concurring).
742               FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                         Gorsuch, J., dissenting

   Notice, too, where trails like this lead. If context could
be cast aside, and a phrase like “just and reasonable” might
suffce in every season, nothing would stop Congress from
granting agencies limitless legislative power. Congress
might delegate to the Secretary of Education the authority
to set a “just and reasonable” tax on university endowments
in order to fund universal education—defned, of course, ac-
cording to four factors and six (or more) incommensurable
principles. Congress might instruct the Secretary of Health
and Human Services to impose a “just and reasonable” tax on
pharmaceutical sales in order to subsidize “universal health
coverage,” defned as an “evolving level” of care that should
be available “at just, reasonable, and affordable rates” to pa-
tients “in all regions of the Nation.” Or Congress might let
the Treasury Department set whatever “just and reason-
able” income tax rates were needed to trim the national debt
to a level “consistent with the public interest, convenience,
Page Proof Pending Publication
and necessity.” If these possibilities strike you as unhinged,
it is because you appreciate that the permissible scope of
delegation must depend on context and the nature and scope
of the power conferred.19

   19
      The Court declines to defend two other arguments petitioners ad-
vance. First, petitioners point to a tax enacted in 1798 as an early in-
stance of broad tax delegation. Brief for Federal Petitioners 23; Brief for
Petitioner Competitive Carriers Association et al. 27–28. But the 1798
tax was a direct tax, and it included an explicit numerical cap on total
receipts ($2 million), apportioned by State. 1 Stat. 597–598; see also Part
II–A; n. 10, supra. So it provides no precedent for § 254. Second, peti-
tioners point to statutes “granting the President broad authority to set
or change tariffs.” Brief for Federal Petitioners 36; see Reply Brief for
Petitioner Competitive Carriers Association et al. 10–11. But it may be,
as the Court's failure to invoke this argument suggests, that tariffs and
domestic taxes present different contexts when it comes to the problem of
delegation. Cf. Department of Transportation v. Association of Ameri-
can Railroads, 575 U. S. 43, 80 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring in judg-
ment); Gundy, 588 U. S., at 159–160 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting).
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             743

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

                                C
   Running out of precedents to work with, the Court sug-
gests, fnally, that it would be “absurd” to ask Congress to
provide more guidance than it has. Ante, at 679. The ar-
gument runs this way. Respondents suggest, and I agree,
that Congress could readily cure § 254's nondelegation prob-
lem. All it needs to do is set a tax rate or (perhaps) specify
a numerical cap or its equivalent. The Court does not dis-
pute that a legislatively defned tax rate would amount to
meaningful guidance. But, the Court contends, some hypo-
thetical caps could be pointless. What if Congress capped
receipts at $5 trillion? Ante, at 680. To suggest that such
a law would provide an “intelligible principle,” while insist-
ing that §§ 254(b) and (c)(1) do not, strikes the Court as mind-
less formalism. Ibid.
   Up to a point, I agree. It may well be that a rate is usu-
ally required to give a domestic tax law an intelligible princi-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ple outside the context of direct taxes. See Part II–A,
supra. Imagine, for instance, that Congress told the IRS to
collect $50 trillion of income tax from the American people
and left it at that. Few, I suspect, would suggest that in-
struction supplies suffcient guidance. But even assuming
that a cap alone might be permissible when it comes to § 254,
the Court too readily dismisses its constitutional value.
   Forcing Congress to supply some cap, any cap, would ad-
vance the nondelegation doctrine's purpose of ensuring “that
the lines of accountability [remain] clear.” Gundy, 588 U. S.,
at 155 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting). If Congress adopted the
Court's ludicrously hypothetical $5 trillion universal-service
tax, the American people would at least know whom to thank
when the corresponding charges showed up on their phone
bills. Even if the FCC chose to collect only a fraction of that
amount, every Member of Congress would have to explain to
his constituents where he stood on a potential $5 trillion tax.
Far more realistically, of course, Congress would never con-
744            FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

template such a silly law, precisely to avoid those awkward
conversations (and the electoral consequences that could
follow).
   And that's exactly the point. The framers divided power
among legislative, executive, and judicial branches not out of
a desire for formal tidiness, but to ensure ours would indeed
be a Nation ruled by “We the People.” See id., at 152. By
vesting executive power in a single President, the framers
hoped to ensure vigorous enforcement of the laws. See
United States v. Arthrex, Inc., 594 U. S. 1, 28 (2021) (Gor-
such, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). And by
vesting judicial power in life-tenured judges, they hoped to
ensure laws would be applied fairly by those insulated from
political pressure. See SEC v. Jarkesy, 603 U. S. 109, 147–
148 (2024) (Gorsuch, J., concurring). But, as the framers
saw it, the power to make the laws that govern our society
belongs to elected representatives more accountable to the
Page Proof Pending Publication
people in whose name they act. See Gundy, 588 U. S., at
154–157 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting). And nowhere did the
framers see that principle as applying with greater force
than in the feld of taxation. See Part II–A, supra.
   In so many other arenas, this Court vigorously polices the
Constitution's allocation of power. We have refused to tol-
erate congressional intrusions on powers reserved to the
President. See Gundy, 588 U. S., at 168 (Gorsuch, J., dis-
senting). We have prohibited the Executive from encroach-
ing on power vested in Congress. Ibid. We have found un-
constitutional, too, legislation seeking to confer judicial
power on the other branches. Ibid.
   Yet there is one exception. When Congress has willingly
surrendered its power to the Executive Branch, this Court's
responses can only be described as feeble. Always, to be
sure, the Court dutifully recites the creed that “[l]egislative
power . . . belongs to the legislative branch, and to no other.”
Ante, at 672. Too often, though, these professions amount (at
most) to faith without works, and the results are not hard to
                   Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)             745

                     Gorsuch, J., dissenting

see. Today, the “vast majority” of the rules that govern our
society are not made by Congress, but by Presidents or agen-
cies they struggle to superintend. J. Adler & C. Walker,
Delegation and Time, 105 Iowa L. Rev. 1931, 1975 (2020).
Those rules refect not the public deliberations of elected
representatives, but the concerns of small cadres of elites.
And as those cadres turn over from administration to admin-
istration, the rules revolve, too, inficting whiplash on those
who must live under them. If there is any consistency over
time, it may be because Presidents and their deputies do not
always call the shots: Lower level offcials, unknown to the
public and sometimes even to the White House, now make
many of the rules we live by. See N. Rao, The Hedgehog &
the Fox in Administrative Law, 150 Daedalus 220, 228–229
(Summer 2021).
   To its credit, the Court has sometimes mitigated its failure
to police legislative delegations by deploying other tools, like
Page Proof Pending Publication
the major questions doctrine and de novo review of statutory
terms, to ensure the Executive “act[s] within the confnes set
by Congress.” Ante, at 705 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring);
see Gundy, 588 U. S., at 166–168 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting).
But every doctrine has its limits. What happens when Con-
gress, weary of the hard business of legislating and facing
strong incentives to pass the buck, cedes its lawmaking
power, clearly and unmistakably, to an executive that craves
it? See id., at 156. No canon of construction can bar the
way. Then, our anemic approach to legislative delegations
leaves the Court with a choice. It can permit the delegation
to stand and move us all one step further from being citizens
in a self-governing republic and one step closer to being sub-
jects of quadrennial kings and long-tenured bureaucrats.
Or the Court can, as it does today, usurp legislative power,
rewrite the statute, and dictate its own terms for Congress's
surrender. Either way, we wind up in much the same place,
only now with judges, rather than Presidents or bureaucrats,
making our laws.
746                 FCC v. CONSUMERS' RESEARCH

                          Gorsuch, J., dissenting

  There is another way. The Constitution promises that our
elected representatives in Congress, and they alone, will
make the laws that bind us. To honor that commitment, his-
torical practice and our cases suggest other guides, beyond
the intelligible principle test, for assessing when Congress
has impermissibly ceded legislative power, as I have pointed
out before. See id., at 157–162. As I have observed, too,
when Chief Justice Taft frst used the phrase “intelligible
principle,” he did not aim to displace those traditional guides,
only to summarize them. Id., at 162 (citing J. W. Hampton,
276 U. S., at 409); see also n. 15, supra. Someday, soon, we
should fnd our way back. By employing the modern, enfee-
bled form of the intelligible principle test, we do the Consti-
tution no favors. And by approving a delegation of Con-
gress's taxing power unprecedented in this Court's history,
we risk making matters worse yet.20


Page          Proof
                 feature of Pending             Publication
  20
       Justice Kavanaugh submits that delegations to the President “have
been a regular               American Government”   since the founding.
Ante, at 699 (concurring opinion). But in drawing conclusions from those
precedents, precision matters. Like the modern intelligible principle test,
traditional nondelegation doctrine paid close attention to the kind of power
at stake. For instance, delegations posed fewer problems in the feld of
foreign affairs, where many “powers are constitutionally vested in the
president under Article II.” Gundy, 588 U. S., at 159 (Gorsuch, J., dis-
senting); see ante, at 706 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring). More generally,
while Congress could not delegate “powers which are strictly and exclu-
sively legislative,” Wayman v. Southard, 10 Wheat. 1, 42–43 (1825), it
could assign other branches “certain non-legislative responsibilities,” par-
ticularly powers historically within the Executive's prerogative. Gundy,
588 U. S., at 159 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting); see McConnell 328–335. So,
for instance, Congress could give the President broad “authority to lay
embargoes” during a congressional recess. Ante, at 700, n. 2 (Kava-
naugh, J., concurring) (citing Act of June 4, 1794, 1 Stat. 372); see McConnell
99. Likewise, Congress could grant the President broad discretion over
“military pensions,” “patents,” and “post roads”—for none of those things
implicated traditionally legislative functions. Ante, at 699–700, n. 2 (Kava-
naugh, J., concurring); see McConnell 154, 331–333. And even within the
heartland of legislative power, Congress could authorize the executive to
fnd facts and “ `fll up the details' ” of whatever policies Congress had
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 656 (2025)                  747

                        Gorsuch, J., dissenting

  Still, there is room for some optimism. The Court today
cannot bring itself to say that §§ 254(c)(3) and (h)(2) survive
even its milquetoast version of the intelligible principle test.
The Court also refuses to sustain § 254(c)(1) as enacted, feel-
ing obliged instead to rewrite that provision before uphold-
ing it. I can imagine worse outcomes than those small steps
toward home. But we can and should do better. When it
comes to other aspects of the separation of powers, we have
found manageable ways to honor the Constitution's design.
This one requires no less of us.
  Respectfully, I dissent.




Page Proof Pending Publication




set. See Gundy, 588 U. S., at 157–159 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting); cf. G.
Lawson, A Private-Law Framework for Subdelegation, in The Administra-
tive State Before the Supreme Court: Perspectives on the Nondelegation
Doctrine 123 (P. Wallison & J. Yoo eds. 2022). So, historically, Congress
could empower the executive and judicial branches to do quite a lot—
except make the laws that govern us.
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of

Page Proof Pending Publication
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

None