PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 604 U. S. Part 1
                                Pages 4–5




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                             November 6, 2024


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
4                      Cite as: 604 U. S. 4 (2024)

                              Per Curiam


      FACEBOOK, INC. v. AMALGAMATED BANK
    on petition for writ of certiorari to the united
     states court of appeals for the ninth circuit
 No. 23–980. Argued November 6, 2024—Decided November 22, 2024
Certiorari dismissed. Reported below: 87 F. 4th 934.

  Per Curiam.
  The writ of certiorari is dismissed as improvidently
granted.
                                        It is so ordered.
  Kannon K. Shanmugam argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the briefs were William T. Marks, Matteo Godi,
Audra J. Soloway, Kristina A. Bunting, Joshua S. Lipshutz,
Katherine Moran Meeks, Michael J. Kahn, and Patrick J.
Fuster.
Page Proof Pending Publication
  Kevin K. Russell argued the cause for respondents. With
him on the brief were Daniel H. Woofter, Jason C. Davis,
Salvatore J. Graziano, Jeremy P. Robinson, Luke O. Brooks,
Joseph D. Daley, and Darryl J. Alvarado.
  Kevin J. Barber argued the cause for the United States as
amicus curiae urging affrmance. With him on the brief
were Solicitor General Prelogar, Deputy Solicitor General
Stewart, Megan Barbero, Michael A. Conley, Jeffrey A.
Berger, and Emily True Parise.*
  *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America et al. by Judson O. Littleton,
Tyler S. Badgley, and Kevin Carroll; for Law Professors et al. by An-
thony J. Franze, Kolya D. Glick, and William T. Sharon; for the Society
for Corporate Governance by Christopher E. Duffy; and for the Washing-
ton Legal Foundation by Lyle Roberts, George E. Anhang, Cory L. An-
drews, and John M. Masslon II.
  Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance were fled for Financial Econo-
mists by Charles Gerstein, Jason Harrow, Leonard Barrack, Gerald J.
Rodos, and William C. Fredericks; for Institutional Investors by Hyland
Hunt, Ruthanne M. Deutsch, Jonathan Gardner, Lauren A. Ormsbee,
                       Cite as: 604 U. S. 4 (2024)                   5

                              Per Curiam




Page Proof Pending Publication




Carol C. Villegas, and Michael P. Canty; for Securities Law Scholars by
John Paul Schnapper-Casteras and Andrew L. Zivitz; and for Technology
Industry Policy Advocates et al. by Elena B. Roberts and Adam D.
Hollander.
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
Page Proof Pending Publication
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

None