(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2023                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

        CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND, ATTORNEY
                    GENERAL

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                  THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

     No. 22–674.      Argued January 8, 2024—Decided June 14, 2024*
To initiate the removal of an alien from the United States who is either
  “inadmissible” under 8 U. S. C. §1182 or “deportable” under §1227, the
  Federal Government must provide the alien with “written notice” of
  the proceedings. §§1229(a)(1), (2). Two types of “written notice” are
  described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of §1229(a): Paragraph (1) provides
  that the alien be given a written “ ‘notice to appear,’ ” or NTA, which
  must set out, among other things, “[t]he time and place at which the
  proceedings will be held.” Paragraph (2) states that “in the case of any
  change or postponement in the time and place of such proceedings,”
  the agency must provide “a written notice” specifying “the new time or
  place of the proceedings” and “the consequences” of failing to attend.
  An alien who fails to attend a hearing despite receiving notice “shall
  be ordered removed in absentia” if the Government “establishes by
  clear, unequivocal, and convincing evidence” that “the written notice”
  was provided and that “the alien is removable.” §1229a(b)(5)(A).
  Three scenarios permit the rescinding of an in absentia removal order,
  one of which is when an alien “demonstrates that [he] did not receive
  notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” of §1229(a).
  §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
     In these consolidated cases (one from the Fifth Circuit, and two from
  the Ninth), aliens Esmelis Campos-Chaves, Varinder Singh, and Raul
  Daniel Mendez-Colín, each moved to rescind his in absentia order of

——————
   *Together with No. 22–884, Garland v. Singh, and Garland v. Mendez-
Colin (see this Court’s Rule 12.4), on certiorari to the United States Court
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
2                    CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                                  Syllabus

    removal on the ground that he did not receive proper notice of the re-
    moval hearing. In each case, the Government provided an initial NTA,
    but the NTA did not specify the time and place of the removal hearing.
    Eventually, the Government provided each alien with a notice of hear-
    ing under §1229(a)(2) which set out the specific time and place of the
    removal hearing. None of the aliens showed up for his hearing, and
    each was ordered removed in absentia by an Immigration Judge. Each
    then sought to rescind the removal order, arguing that he did not re-
    ceive a proper NTA under §1229(a)(1). The Fifth Circuit considered
    and denied one of the petitions, but the Ninth Circuit granted the other
    two.
Held: Because each of the aliens in this case received a proper
 §1229(a)(2) notice for the hearings they missed and at which they were
 ordered removed, they cannot seek rescission of their in absentia re-
 moval orders on the basis of defective notice under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
 Pp 7–16.
     (a) These cases turn on whether Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Men-
 dez-Colín can “demonstrat[e]” that they “did not receive notice in ac-
 cordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a).”
 §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). The Government reads that provision to permit
 rescission only when the alien did not receive notice of the hearing he
 failed to attend. Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín, on the
 other hand, urge a reading of the provision’s word “or” that would dis-
 tribute the phrase “did not receive notice in accordance with” across
 “paragraph (1) or (2).” They argue that because each can “demon-
 strat[e]” that he “did not receive” an NTA, they each can seek rescis-
 sion of their in absentia removal orders. Pp. 7–8.
     (b) The Government’s provision of a single notice under either par-
 agraph (1) or (2) defeats rescission under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). The word
 “ ‘or’ ” is “ ‘almost always disjunctive.’ ” Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Na-
 varro, 584 U. S. 79, 87. Thus, §1229a(b)(5)’s ordinary meaning is that
 either a paragraph (1) notice or a paragraph (2) notice can count as
 “notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).” Statutory contexts
 points in the same direction. For example, nearby §1229a(b)(5)(A) also
 refers to “paragraph (1) or (2)” notice. There, however, the “or” is un-
 ambiguously disjunctive, and there is no way to distribute language
 across the “or” that can provide an alternative meaning. Furthermore,
 subparagraph (A) requires the Government to establish that it pro-
 vided “the written notice,” indicating that only a single notice must be
 provided in a single document. Niz-Chavez, 593 U. S., at 166. Pp. 8–
 10.
     (c) In §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), “notice in accordance with paragraph (1)
 or (2)” refers to the notice for the hearing the alien missed and at which
 he was ordered removed. Notice under paragraph (2) supersedes the
                     Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                     3

                                Syllabus

  NTA; when there is paragraph (2) notice, it is that notice which in-
  forms the alien when to appear, not the NTA. As previously noted,
  §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)’s “notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)”
  must correspond with §1229(b)(5)(A)’s “the written notice.” The only
  way to make sense of §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)’s reference to a single notice
  is for that notice to be the one that informed the alien of the time and
  date of the hearing the alien missed, and at which he was ordered re-
  moved. That reading also gives the provision a “substantive effect that
  is compatible with the rest of the law.” United Sav. Assn. of Tex. v.
  Timbers of Inwood Forest Associates, Ltd., 484 U. S. 365, 371. Pp. 10–
  12.
     (d) Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín all received “notice
  in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” for the hearings they missed,
  and thus their in absentia removal orders may not be rescinded on that
  ground. The Government concedes that none of them received a com-
  pliant NTA. Each did, however, receive a “notice in accordance with
  paragraph . . . (2),” and each notice met all of the requirements for a
  notice under that provision. After receiving a defective NTA, each al-
  ien received a notice that provided a specific time and place for their
  removal proceedings. Those notices provided “new” times, and thereby
  “change[d]” the time and place of their removal proceedings, within the
  meaning of §1229(a)(2). Pp. 13–16.
No. 22–674, 54 F. 4th 314, affirmed; No. 22–884, 24 F. 4th 1315, reversed
 (Mendez- Colín) and vacated and remanded (Singh).

   ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and THOMAS, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. JACKSON, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, and GORSUCH, JJ.,
joined.
                        Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                           Nos. 22–674 and 22–884
                                   _________________


  MORIS ESMELIS CAMPOS-CHAVES, PETITIONER
22–674              v.
   MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

   MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL,
                 PETITIONER
22–884                v.
               VARINDER SINGH
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
                                 [June 14, 2024]

  JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
  When the Government seeks to remove an alien, it is re-
quired to notify the alien of the time and place of the re-
moval hearings. Title 8 U. S. C. §1229(a) describes two
types of notice—an initial notice to appear under paragraph
(1), and, “in the case of any change or postponement in the
time and place of ” the removal proceedings, a notice of
hearing under paragraph (2). When an alien fails to appear
at his removal hearing despite receiving such notice, he
“shall be ordered removed in absentia” if the Government
can make certain showings. §1229a(b)(5)(A). The alien can
seek to have that order rescinded, however, if the alien can
demonstrate that he “did not receive notice in accordance
with paragraph (1) or (2) of [§1229(a)].”
  We granted certiorari in these cases to consider what it
2               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     Opinion of the Court

means to “demonstrat[e] that the alien did not receive no-
tice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).” §1229a(b)
(5)(C)(ii); 600 U. S. ___ (2023). Each of the aliens in these
cases argues that he may seek rescission because he did not
receive a notice to appear that complies with paragraph (1).
We hold that, to rescind an in absentia removal order on the
ground that the alien “did not receive notice in accordance
with paragraph (1) or (2),” the alien must show that he did
not receive notice under either paragraph for the hearing at
which the alien was absent and ordered removed. Because
each of the aliens in these cases received a proper para-
graph (2) notice for the hearings they missed and at which
they were ordered removed, they cannot seek rescission of
their in absentia removal orders on the basis of defective
notice under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
                              I
                              A
  The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 66 Stat. 163,
as amended, 8 U. S. C. §1101 et seq., sets out “how persons
are admitted to, and removed from, the United States.”
Pereida v. Wilkinson, 592 U. S. 224, 227 (2021). An alien is
removable if he is either “inadmissible” under §1182 or “de-
portable” under §1227. 8 U. S. C. §1229a(e)(2). When the
Federal Government decides to place an alien in removal
proceedings, the INA requires that the alien be provided
with “written notice.” §§1229(a)(1), (2).
  That “written notice” can take one of two forms. First,
under paragraph (1) of §1229(a), the alien “shall be given”
a “ ‘notice to appear,’ ” or NTA. The NTA must set out,
among other things, “[t]he nature of the proceedings
against the alien,” “[t]he legal authority under which the
proceedings are conducted,” “[t]he time and place at which
the proceedings will be held,” and the consequences of fail-
ing to appear. §1229(a)(1). In Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             3

                      Opinion of the Court

U. S. 155 (2021), we held that this information must be pro-
vided in a single document in order to satisfy §1229(a)(1).
Id., at 160–162. Second, under paragraph (2), “in the case
of any change or postponement in the time and place of such
proceedings,” the agency must provide “a written notice”
specifying “the new time or place of the proceedings” and
“the consequences” of failing to attend. §1229(a)(2).
   Aliens who receive such written notice are expected to at-
tend their hearings. Section 1229a(b)(5)(A) provides the
consequences for aliens who, “after written notice required
under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a) of this title has
been provided,” fail to attend “a proceeding under this sec-
tion.” Such aliens “shall be ordered removed in absentia” if
the Government “establishes by clear, unequivocal, and
convincing evidence that the written notice was so provided
and that the alien is removable.” §1229a(b)(5)(A).
   There are three scenarios in which an in absentia re-
moval order may be rescinded. First, the alien can file a
motion to reopen within 180 days of the order, and must
demonstrate that the failure to appear was because of “ex-
ceptional circumstances.” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). Second, an al-
ien can seek to rescind his in absentia removal order if he
“demonstrates that the alien was in Federal or State cus-
tody and the failure to appear was through no fault of the
alien.” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). Third, there is the scenario im-
plicated by these cases: an alien can seek rescission if he
“demonstrates that the alien did not receive notice in ac-
cordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” of §1229(a). Ibid.
                              B
  We consolidated three cases brought by aliens who moved
for rescission on the ground that they did not receive proper
notice. Though the facts vary, the key details are the same
in each case. The Government failed to provide a single-
document NTA, but eventually provided each alien with a
notice specifying the time and place of the removal hearing.
4               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

When each alien failed to show up for the hearing, an Im-
migration Judge entered an in absentia order of removal.
Each alien then sought rescission of that order under
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). In all three cases, an Immigration
Judge and the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) refused
to reopen the proceedings, prompting the aliens to file a pe-
tition for review in federal court. The Fifth Circuit consid-
ered and denied one of these petitions, but the Ninth Circuit
granted the other two.
                              1
   Moris Esmelis Campos-Chaves is the petitioner from the
Fifth Circuit. He is a native and citizen of El Salvador, and
he entered the United States in 2005 without inspection
near Laredo, Texas. Three days later, the Government ini-
tiated removal proceedings by serving an NTA, charging
that he was removable under §1182(a)(6)(A)(i). The NTA
provided the address of the immigration court, but told
Campos-Chaves to appear on “a date to be set” and at “a
time to be set.” App. 54. The Government followed up a
few months later, sending Campos-Chaves a notice of hear-
ing that set the hearing date to be September 20, 2005, at 9
a.m.
   Campos-Chaves never appeared.           The Immigration
Judge noted his absence and the lack of any explanation for
it. Upon finding that “clear, convincing, and unequivocal”
evidence established Campos-Chaves’s removability, the
Immigration Judge ordered him removed in absentia. App.
to Pet. for Cert. in No. 22–674, p. 16a.
   Thirteen years later, Campos-Chaves filed a motion to re-
open his removal proceedings on the theory that he never
received a proper NTA. He relied on our decision in Pereira
v. Sessions, 585 U. S. 198 (2018), in which we held that “[a]
putative notice to appear that fails to designate the specific
time or place” of the removal proceedings “is not a ‘notice to
appear under section 1229(a).’ ” Id., at 208–209 (quoting 8
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           5

                     Opinion of the Court

U. S. C. §1229b(d)(1)). The Immigration Judge denied
Campos-Chaves’s motion, and the BIA dismissed his subse-
quent appeal. The BIA relied on prior precedent in which
it had held that an in absentia order of removal may not be
rescinded merely because the NTA lacked time and place
information “so long as a subsequent [notice of hearing]
specifying that information was properly sent to the alien.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 22–674, at 8a.
   Campos-Chaves filed a petition for review in the Fifth
Circuit. After withdrawing and amending one opinion, the
Fifth Circuit denied his petition, relying on the fact that
Campos-Chaves “d[id] not dispute that he . . . received the
subsequent [notice].” 54 F. 4th 314, 315 (2022).
                             2
  Varinder Singh is one of the two respondents from the
Ninth Circuit. He is a native and citizen of India who en-
tered the United States in 2016 by climbing over a fence
near Calexico, California. Several weeks later, the Govern-
ment served an NTA that charged Singh as removable un-
der §1182(a)(6)(A)(i) and indicated that the date and time
of the hearing was “TBD.” App. 11. Five days later, the
Government sent a notice of hearing to Singh’s given ad-
dress that provided a specific time and date. About two
years later, in October 2018, the immigration court sent a
new notice of hearing to Singh’s address, rescheduling the
hearing for November 26, 2018, at 1 p.m.
  When that date arrived, Singh failed to appear. Because
the Government did not have his file, however, the immi-
gration court rescheduled the hearing for December 12,
2018, at 9 a.m., again sending a notice to Singh’s address.
Singh failed to appear at that hearing as well. The Immi-
gration Judge determined that Singh was removable, and
accordingly entered an in absentia order of removal.
  In April 2019, Singh sought to rescind his removal order.
Like Campos-Chaves, Singh argued that rescission was
6               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

warranted because he did not receive a proper NTA under
Pereira. The Immigration Judge and the BIA disagreed, so
Singh petitioned for review by the Ninth Circuit.
   The Ninth Circuit granted his petition. 24 F. 4th 1315,
1317 (2022). The panel held that the lack of a single-docu-
ment NTA alone rendered Singh’s in absentia removal or-
der rescindable. Id., at 1319–1320. The Government’s pe-
tition for rehearing en banc was denied. 51 F. 4th 371
(2022). Judge Collins, joined by 11 other judges, dissented.
Id., at 371–382.
                                3
   Raul Daniel Mendez-Colín, a native and citizen of Mex-
ico, is the other respondent from the Ninth Circuit. He at-
tempted to enter the United States in 2001 at San Luis, Ar-
izona, with two other aliens, falsely claiming that he was a
United States citizen. The next day, he was served an NTA,
which      charged      him     with   removability    under
§1182(a)(6)(E)(i). The NTA included the immigration
court’s address, but provided only that the date and time
were “[t]o be set.” App. 46.
   Soon thereafter, the immigration court mailed Mendez-
Colín a notice of hearing, with a specific date and time for a
hearing later that year. Mendez-Colín appeared at that
hearing. The immigration court ultimately scheduled mul-
tiple additional hearings to take place in 2002. For each,
the Immigration Judge provided a notice of hearing to ei-
ther Mendez-Colín or his attorney, who attended all of the
2002 hearings.
   The Immigration Judge sustained the charge of remova-
bility at the last of those hearings. Mendez-Colín expressed
his desire to apply for cancellation of removal, prompting
the immigration court to mail a notice to his attorney for an
individual hearing on September 15, 2003, at 9 a.m.
   Days before the September 15 hearing, Mendez-Colín’s
attorney filed a motion to withdraw as counsel because of
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             7

                      Opinion of the Court

his client’s “fail[ure] to maintain contact.” Record in No.
20–71846 (CA9), ECF Doc. 9–2, p. 77. Nonetheless, the at-
torney attended the September 15 hearing, where the Im-
migration Judge granted the motion to withdraw but re-
tained the attorney for “the limited purpose of serv[ing any]
in absentia order.” Id., at 155. The Immigration Judge de-
termined that Mendez-Colín “abandoned any and all
claim(s) for relief from removal” and ordered him removed
in absentia. Id., at 156.
   Mendez-Colín filed two motions to reopen his removal
proceedings in December 2003 and February 2004, respec-
tively. The Immigration Judge denied both. Mendez-Colín
appealed the denial of his second motion to reopen, but the
BIA considered the appeal withdrawn when he was re-
moved from the United States during its pendency.
   About 15 years later, Mendez-Colín moved to reinstate
his appeal, now claiming that his in absentia order of re-
moval was rescindable because of his defective NTA. The
BIA denied the motion, prompting Mendez-Colín to file a
petition for review, which was heard by the same Ninth Cir-
cuit panel that heard Singh. 2022 WL 342959 (2022). The
panel granted the petition in an unpublished opinion, ibid.,
and the full court denied the Government’s en banc petition
alongside the en banc petition in Singh. 50 F. 4th, at 942,
946 (2022).
                              II
  We granted certiorari in all three cases to decide whether
an alien can seek rescission of an in absentia removal order
indefinitely whenever the Government fails to provide a
single-document NTA. The Government concedes that, in
all three cases, the NTAs lacked a specific time and date
and thus failed to comply with §1229(a)(1). And before this
Court, each alien argues that he is eligible for rescission un-
der §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). Thus, this litigation turns on
whether Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín can
8               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

“demonstrat[e]” that they “did not receive notice in accord-
ance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a).”
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
   The Government reads §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) to permit re-
scission only when the alien did not receive notice of the
hearing he failed to attend. In each of these cases, the alien
was ordered removed in absentia at a hearing for which he
received notice. The Government argues that those notices
of hearing complied with paragraph (2), and that each alien
thereby “receive[d] notice in accordance with paragraph (1)
or (2) of section 1229(a).” Ibid. That, continues the Govern-
ment, means the aliens are ineligible for rescission of their
in absentia removal orders.
   Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín read the stat-
ute differently and urge a distributive reading of the “or” in
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). That is, they distribute the phrase “did
not receive notice in accordance with” across “paragraph (1)
or (2),” such that an alien can have his in absentia removal
order rescinded if he “demonstrates” that he “did not receive
notice in accordance with” paragraph (1) or that he “did not
receive notice in accordance with” paragraph (2). Because
each alien can “demonstrat[e]” that he “did not receive” an
NTA, they argue that they each can seek rescission of their
in absentia removal orders. Brief for Respondent Singh 47.
   We agree with the Government. An alien can have his in
absentia removal order rescinded under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)
only if he can demonstrate that he “did not receive” a para-
graph (1) notice or a paragraph (2) notice—whichever cor-
responds to the hearing at which he was ordered removed
in absentia. Each alien before us received paragraph (2)
notices for the hearings they missed. They are therefore
ineligible for rescission of their in absentia removal orders.
                               A
  As always, we start with the text. Bartenwerfer v. Buck-
ley, 598 U. S. 69, 74 (2023). And here, the text provides that
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)              9

                       Opinion of the Court

to be eligible for rescission of his in absentia removal order
an alien must “demonstrat[e] that the alien did not receive
notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section
1229(a).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). The word “ ‘or’ ” is “ ‘almost al-
ways disjunctive,’ ” Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 584
U. S. 79, 87 (2018) (quoting United States v. Woods, 571
U. S. 31, 45 (2013)), and is generally used “to indicate . . .
an alternative,” Webster’s Third New International Dic-
tionary 1585 (1993); see also Woods, 571 U. S., at 45–46. So
here, §1229a(b)(5)’s ordinary meaning is that either a par-
agraph (1) notice or a paragraph (2) notice can count as “no-
tice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).”
   Of course, “statutory context can overcome the ordinary,
disjunctive meaning of ‘or.’ ” Encino Motorcars, 584 U. S.,
at 87; see also Pulsifer v. United States, 601 U. S. 124, 151
(2024) (“[C]onjunctions are versatile words, which can work
differently depending on context”). But statutory context
points in the same direction as the usual meaning here.
Consider §1229a(b)(5)(A), just two subparagraphs earlier,
which sets out the preconditions for an alien to be removed
in absentia in the first place. That subparagraph provides:
      “Any alien who, after written notice required under
    paragraph (1) or (2) of [§1229(a)] has been provided to
    the alien or the alien’s counsel of record, does not at-
    tend a proceeding under this section, shall be ordered
    removed in absentia if the Service establishes by clear,
    unequivocal, and convincing evidence that the written
    notice was so provided and that the alien is removable.”
  Just as in subparagraph (C), subparagraph (A) refers to
“paragraph (1) or (2)” notice. In subparagraph (A), how-
ever, the “or” is unambiguously disjunctive; there is no way
to distribute language across the “or” that can provide an
alternative meaning of the statute. On any reading, sub-
paragraph (A) does not require both paragraphs (1) and (2)
10              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

notice before an alien can be removed in absentia. It re-
quires only one.
    Furthermore, subparagraph (A) requires the Govern-
ment to establish that it provided “the written notice.”
§1229a(b)(5)(A) (emphasis added); see also ibid. (“The writ-
ten notice by the Attorney General shall be considered suf-
ficient for purposes of this subparagraph if provided at the
most recent address provided under section 1229(a)(1)(F)”
(emphasis added)). In Niz-Chavez, we concluded that the
phrase “ ‘the notice described in paragraph (1) or (2) of sec-
tion 1229(a)’ ” indicated that the notice must be provided in
one document. 593 U. S., at 166 (quoting §1229a(b)(7)); see
also id., at 165 (“[A]n article coupled with a singular noun
. . . suggest[s] a discrete document”). If “the notice” denotes
a single document, it certainly must denote a single notice.
And as long as the Government can show—under the given
burden of proof—that the alien is removable and was pro-
vided “the written notice,” the alien “shall be ordered re-
moved in absentia.” §1229a(b)(5)(A) (emphasis added).
Subparagraph (A) clearly contemplates in absentia removal
of aliens who received only one notice under paragraph (1)
or (2).
    Indeed, concluding otherwise would create a mismatch in
the statutory scheme. Under the aliens’ theory, it is more
difficult for the Government to defend an in absentia re-
moval order than it is to obtain one in the first place. An
alien can be removed in absentia on the basis of receiving
one notice, but the aliens would read §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) to
permit rescission of that order for failure to receive both
types of notices. Brief for Respondent Singh 22. We doubt
that Congress intended such an incongruity. See Da-
costagomez-Aguilar v. United States Atty. Gen., 40 F. 4th
1312, 1317 (CA11 2022) (“It would be nonsensical to invali-
date an in absentia removal order because two kinds of no-
tice were not received when only one was required in the
first place”).
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           11

                      Opinion of the Court

                               B
  Our conclusion that a single notice defeats rescission un-
der §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) does not end the analysis, however.
We still must determine which notice the alien must show
was lacking in order to have his in absentia removal order
rescinded. We hold that, in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), “notice in
accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” refers to the notice for
the hearing the alien missed, and at which he was ordered
removed.
  Section 1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) cross-references paragraphs (1)
and (2) of §1229(a). Paragraph (1) notice—the NTA—is the
initial document notifying the alien of “removal proceedings
under” §1229a. Paragraph (2) notice issues “in the case of
any change or postponement in the time and place of such
proceedings” and provides the “new time or place of the pro-
ceedings.” Thus, notice under paragraph (2) supersedes the
NTA; when there is paragraph (2) notice, it is that notice
which informs the alien when to appear, not the NTA.
  Now turn back to §1229a. As noted before, for the statu-
tory scheme to make sense, “notice in accordance with par-
agraph (1) or (2)” in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) must correspond
with “the written notice” mentioned in §1229a(b)(5)(A).
And §1229a(b)(5)(A) contemplates a very specific process.
An alien “shall be ordered removed in absentia” when he
“does not attend a proceeding under this section” and the
Government establishes, among other things, that “the
written notice was so provided.” (Emphasis added.) Thus,
“the written notice” is tied to the singular proceeding
missed, and at which the alien was “removed in absentia.”
Whether that notice was issued under paragraph (1) as an
NTA or under paragraph (2), it is that notice which the Gov-
ernment must prove was provided to remove an alien in ab-
sentia. And it is that notice which the alien must prove was
not provided in order to have his in absentia removal order
rescinded.
  This reading aligns with common sense. See Koons Buick
12              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

Pontiac GMC, Inc. v. Nigh, 543 U. S. 50, 63 (2004) (“ ‘[T]here
is no canon against using common sense in construing laws
as saying what they obviously mean’ ” (quoting Roschen v.
Ward, 279 U. S. 337, 339 (1929)). The Government does not
argue that either a paragraph (1) or a paragraph (2) notice
is always sufficient regardless of which corresponds to the
hearing the alien missed. A simple hypothetical demon-
strates why. Suppose the Government sent a fully compli-
ant NTA to the alien, specifying the time, date, and place of
the hearing. Suppose then that the Government changed
the hearing date without sending any notice whatsoever to
the alien, and that the alien was ordered removed in absen-
tia at that hearing. Literally, the alien received “notice in
accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
But no one would say the alien is thereby ineligible to seek
rescission of a removal order entered at a hearing for which
he never received notice.
   The only way to make sense of §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)’s refer-
ence to a single notice is for that notice to be the one that
matters: the one that informed the alien of the time and
date of the hearing the alien missed, and at which he was
ordered removed. That reading also gives the provision a
“substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the
law.” United Sav. Assn. of Tex. v. Timbers of Inwood Forest
Associates, Ltd., 484 U. S. 365, 371 (1988). Recall the other
two scenarios in which an in absentia removal order may
be rescinded. In those, the alien must either demonstrate
that “the failure to appear was because of exceptional cir-
cumstances,” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), or that he “was in Federal
or State custody and the failure to appear was through no
fault of the alien,” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). For either, relief is
conditioned upon the alien’s showing he was not at fault for
failing to appear. See §1229a(e)(1) (defining “exceptional
circumstances” to be “beyond the control of the alien”). We
think Congress had the same idea in the third scenario.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             13

                       Opinion of the Court

The alien’s failure to appear is excused by his failure to re-
ceive a paragraph (1) or (2) notice only if that notice would
have informed the alien of the relevant hearing.
                               C
    Finally, we must decide whether Campos-Chaves, Singh,
and Mendez-Colín received “notice in accordance with par-
agraph (1) or (2)” for the hearings they missed. We hold
that they did, and that their in absentia removal orders
thus may not be rescinded on that ground.
    The Government concedes—as it must under Pereira and
Niz-Chavez—that none of the aliens received an NTA com-
pliant with §1229(a)(1). Each alien’s NTA provided only
that the time of the hearing was “TBD” or “to be set,” which
is the sort of language we found to be inadequate in Pereira.
See 585 U. S., at 206 (NTA which ordered alien to appear
“ ‘on a date to be set at a time to be set’ ” was insufficient to
satisfy §1229(a)(1)). This litigation thus turns on whether
the aliens received “notice in accordance with paragraph . . .
(2).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
    They each did. Paragraph (2) provides that, “in the case
of any change or postponement in the time and place” of
removal proceedings, “a written notice shall be given” to the
alien that includes “the new time or place of the proceed-
ings” and the consequences of “failing . . . to attend such
proceedings.” §1229(a)(2)(A). Each requirement was met
here. Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín were no-
tified of the time of the hearing and the consequences of
failing to appear. Those times were all “new”: those notices
were the first time any of the aliens were informed when
those specific hearings would take place. And those notices
were for the hearings which they missed, and at which they
were ordered removed. All three thus in fact received “no-
tice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” within the
meaning of §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
    The aliens argue otherwise, focusing on the requirement
14              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      Opinion of the Court

that paragraph (2) notice be given “in the case of any change
or postponement in the time and place of such proceedings.”
In their view, there cannot have been a “change” in the time
of the proceedings if no time had ever been set. The same
goes for the requirement that paragraph (2) notice give “the
new time or place of the proceedings.” According to the al-
iens, there cannot be a “new” time without an old time. In
effect, the aliens think that there cannot be paragraph (2)
notice without an earlier paragraph (1) notice.
   We reject both textual arguments. The aliens take too
narrow a reading of the term “change.” In their telling,
“change” means “substitution,” and substitution presup-
poses that there was a date before. See Brief for Petitioner
Campos-Chaves 16–17. But to “change” can also mean “to
replace with another or others of the same kind or class,”
“to switch to another,” to “alter,” or to “modify.” Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 373–374 (1986). What
happened here fits under any of those definitions. The no-
tice of hearing Campos-Chaves received “changed”—that is,
“replaced,” “switched,” or “substituted”—a “date to be set”
and a “time to be set” to “Sep 20, 2005,” and “9:00 A.M.,”
respectively. App. 50. The notice of hearing Singh received
“changed” the “TBD” in his NTA to “Dec. 12, 2018,” and
“9:00 A.M.” Id., at 1. And the notice of hearing Mendez-
Colín received “changed”—that is, “altered” or “modified”—
the time and place of his proceedings by adding a hearing
on September 15, 2003, at 9 a.m. The aliens’ cramped read-
ing of “change” is out of place here, especially given that the
statute refers to “any change.” §1229(a)(2) (emphasis
added); see Patel v. Garland, 596 U. S. 328, 338 (2022)
(“[T]he word ‘any’ has an expansive meaning” (some inter-
nal quotation marks omitted)).
   The aliens’ argument that a “new” time or place requires
an “old” time or place fares no better. In fact, it runs against
how that word is ordinarily used. No one thinks that con-
gratulating a couple on having a “new” baby implies that
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           15

                      Opinion of the Court

the couple is replacing an “old” baby. The word “new” de-
scribes something that has “originated or occurred lately,”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, at 1522, or
is “novel,” ibid. The times provided by the aliens’ notices of
hearing were all those things. The first occasion on which
Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín were informed
of the time of the particular hearing was when they received
their hearing notices. Nonetheless, they failed to show up
at those hearings, and in their absence they were ordered
removed. They received a “notice in accordance with” par-
agraph (2), and thus cannot seek rescission under
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
   Finally, the aliens argue that we have already decided
that a paragraph (2) notice requires that the alien has re-
ceived an adequate NTA. They point to our statement in
Pereira that “paragraph (2) presumes that the Government
has already served [an NTA] that specified a time and
place” because “[o]therwise, there would be no time or place
to ‘change or postpon[e].’ ” 585 U. S., at 210 (quoting
§1229(a)(2)). That case concerned the “narrow question” of
the operation of the so-called stop-time rule. Id., at 202. To
be eligible for cancellation of removal relief, an alien must
have been “physically present in the United States for a
continuous period of not less than 10 years.” §1229b(b)
(1)(A). Under the stop-time rule, however, an alien’s time
in the country generally ceases to count when he “is served
a notice to appear under section 1229(a).” §1229b(d)(1)(A).
In Pereira, we decided that, for a notice to qualify as an NTA
and to trigger the stop-time rule, it must include time and
place information. Id., at 202.
   We did not reach out to decide today’s question in that
case. The meaning of §1229(a)(2) was not at issue in Pe-
reira. Indeed, when the Government in Pereira argued that
§1229b(d)(1)(A)’s reference to a “notice to appear under sec-
tion 1229(a)” referred to paragraph (2) as well, the Court’s
16                 CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                          Opinion of the Court

first—and sufficient—response was that the “broad refer-
ence” to §1229(a) was “of no consequence,” because “only
paragraph (1) bears on the meaning of a ‘notice to appear.’ ”
Id., at 209. Only then did the Court go on to state the lan-
guage on which the aliens rely so heavily—that paragraph
(2) “presumes” an adequate NTA, and that paragraph (2)
therefore, “[i]f anything,” “bolsters” the bottom-line conclu-
sion that an NTA must include time and place information.
Ibid. (emphasis added). To the extent Pereira discussed
paragraph (2), its language was mere dicta.1
   Today’s decision does not mean that the Government is
free of its obligation to provide an NTA. That document has
an important place within the statutory scheme because it
contains information that aliens may need to present their
case, including the conduct for which they are charged and
the provisions of law they allegedly violated.            See
§§1229(a)(1)(A)–(E). Although an alien who receives only
paragraph (2) notice must still attend the hearing or face in
absentia removal, he can raise issues regarding incomplete
notice at that time. That gives the immigration judge a
chance to reschedule the hearing to cure any prejudice from
the missing information. But §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) does not
allow aliens to seek rescission of removal orders in perpetu-
ity based on arguments they could have raised in a hearing
that they chose to skip.
                       *   *     *
  We affirm the judgment of the Fifth Circuit and reverse
the Ninth Circuit’s judgment in Garland v. Mendez-Colín.
——————
   1 The aliens’ invocation of Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155 (2021),

fares no better. In that case, we recognized that §1229(a)(2) “permits
[the Government] to send a supplemental notice amending the time and
place of an alien’s hearing if logistics require a change.” Id., at 170.
Thus, if it turns out that the chosen time and place in the NTA is incon-
venient, the Government is free to amend it through a paragraph (2) no-
tice. Ibid. That point remains true even if there are other instances in
which paragraph (2) notices may issue.
                     Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                    17

                          Opinion of the Court

We vacate the Ninth Circuit’s judgment in Garland v.
Singh, and remand that case for further proceedings con-
sistent with this opinion.2

                                                      It is so ordered.




——————
  2 The Ninth Circuit’s holding that Singh had shown that he failed to

receive “notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” meant that it did
not reach his alternative argument that he could seek rescission under
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). 24 F. 4th 1315, 1320 (2020). Neither do we.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           1

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                   Nos. 22–674 and 22–884
                         _________________


  MORIS ESMELIS CAMPOS-CHAVES, PETITIONER
22–674              v.
   MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

   MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL,
                 PETITIONER
22–884                v.
               VARINDER SINGH
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
                        [June 14, 2024]

   JUSTICE JACKSON, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR,
JUSTICE KAGAN, and JUSTICE GORSUCH join, dissenting.
   Although Congress allows the Government to seek re-
moval of noncitizens in absentia, it tempers that power with
process. Mandatory removal of a noncitizen who fails to at-
tend a scheduled removal hearing is available. 8 U. S. C.
§1229a(b)(5)(A). But to obtain such a removal order, the
Government must satisfy certain procedural prerequisites.
See ibid. Relevant here, the Government must have pro-
vided the noncitizen with specific forms of notice that con-
tain specific information. Ibid. (referencing §§1229(a)(1)–
(2)). A noncitizen who has been ordered removed in absen-
tia but has not received the required notice may seek to
have the removal proceedings reopened and his removal or-
der rescinded. §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
   For years, the Government has failed to ensure that one
form of required notice—a “notice to appear” (hereinafter
2               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

NTA)—contains all the information the statute mandates.
See §1229(a)(1). Specifically, the Government has issued
NTAs that lack the exact time (and date) of a noncitizen’s
removal hearing. Contra, §1229(a)(1)(G)(i). This conspicu-
ous omission has twice before garnered our attention in
cases concerning a noncitizen’s plea for discretionary relief
from removal—most recently, just three Terms ago. See
Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155 (2021); Pereira v. Ses-
sions, 585 U. S. 198 (2018). And twice over, this Court
made clear that when the Government issues an NTA, that
document must contain the time-and-place particulars that
the statute requires.
  Today’s cases arise because the Government persisted
with its practice of issuing facially defective NTAs in the
wake of our two prior pronouncements. But, apparently,
the third time is the charm, for the majority now finally
blesses the Government’s abject noncompliance with the
statute’s unequivocal command. The Court concludes that
a noncitizen whose NTA does not contain the time-and-date
information that §1229(a)(1) requires has no recourse from
an in absentia removal order if the Government subse-
quently provides some followup notice identifying the time
and date of the proceeding he missed. Ante, at 2. But that
holding defies the plain text and context of the statute, side-
steps our precedents, and upends the careful in absentia re-
moval framework Congress has crafted. So, I respectfully
dissent.
                               I
  Because a noncitizen may seek rescission only if he
“demonstrates that [he] did not receive notice in accord-
ance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a),”
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), I agree with the majority that the cen-
tral question in this litigation is what it means to receive
notice “in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2),” ibid. As
the parties frame the issue, the question is whether a
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                      3

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

noncitizen who has been ordered removed in absentia can
seek rescission if the Government initially fails to identify
a time and date for the removal hearing, as paragraph (1)
requires, but provides such information at a later date, pur-
portedly under paragraph (2).1 The majority reads “notice
in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a),”
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), to preclude a motion to reopen under
these circumstances. In my view, the majority’s reasoning
is flawed and leads to the wrong conclusion.
                                  A
    To understand why, one must first be clear-eyed about
the Government’s arguments, and also the majority’s asser-
tions. No one disputes that §1229(a) establishes a manda-
tory process for the initiation of removal proceedings that
compels the Government to provide “written notice” to any
noncitizen it intends to remove as inadmissible or deporta-
ble.
    Paragraph (1) states that “written notice (in this section
referred to as a ‘notice to appear’) shall be given in person
. . . or, if personal service is not practicable, through service
by mail.” §1229(a)(1). That provision then proceeds to list
not one or two but seven categories of information that must
be “specif[ied]” in the NTA—including “[t]he acts or conduct
alleged to be in violation of [the] law,” §1229(a)(1)(C); the
——————
   1 I will assume, arguendo, that rescission is the only legal argument

implicated by these facts, given the parties’ presentations. It is notewor-
thy, however, that the same core question also arises two subdivisions
earlier—under §1229a(b)(5)(A)—which authorizes the issuance of an in
absentia removal order in the first place only “after written notice re-
quired under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a) . . . has been provided
to the [noncitizen],” and only if the Government “establishes by clear,
unequivocal, and convincing evidence that the written notice was so pro-
vided.” Thus, it is not at all clear that defects on the face of an NTA
should be addressed as a matter of reopening and rescission (with the
noncitizen bearing the burden) rather than as part of an assessment of
the validity of the removal order itself, given the Government’s burden
of proof and the arguable facial invalidity of the notice.
4               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

fact that the noncitizen “may be represented by counsel”
during the removal proceedings, §1229(a)(1)(E); and “[t]he
time and place at which the proceedings will be held,”
§1229(a)(1)(G)(i).
   Paragraph (2) also requires the Government to provide “a
written notice” to removable noncitizens under specified
circumstances. §1229(a)(2). But, unlike paragraph (1), that
provision applies only “in the case of any change or post-
ponement in the time and place of such proceedings.” Ibid.
It requires that “a written notice shall be given in person,”
or “through service by mail” if “personal service is not prac-
ticable.” Ibid. Paragraph (2) further specifically identifies
the two categories of information that this particular notice
must contain: “(i) the new time or place of the proceedings,
and (ii) the consequences under section 1229a(b)(5) of this
title of failing, except under exceptional circumstances, to
attend such proceedings.” Ibid.
   So far, so good. Everyone agrees up to this point. The
dispute here arises because the Government insists that its
chronic failure to provide complete NTAs under
§1229(a)(1)—e.g., notices that contain time-and-date infor-
mation—is of no moment with respect to any subsequent in
absentia removal effort. So long as the Government pro-
vides the noncitizen with a paragraph (2) notice of the time
and date of a removal hearing that the noncitizen subse-
quently misses, the noncitizen cannot reopen his removal
proceeding, the Government claims.
   Consider the cases before us. As the majority has ex-
plained, ante, at 3–4, each of the noncitizens here received
a statutorily deficient NTA—deficient because it was miss-
ing the time and date of a removal proceeding. The NTAs
the Government provided instead stated that information
as either “TBD” or “to be set.” App. 10–12, 44–46, 53–54.
Both the majority and the Government acknowledge that
such notices were deficient under the statute. See ante, at
13; Brief for Attorney General 26. Each of the noncitizens
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             5

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

later received one or more followup documents that pro-
vided time-and-date information for a removal hearing.
Each of the noncitizens ultimately failed to attend a hear-
ing noticed by such a followup document and was ordered
removed in absentia. And each of the noncitizens then
sought to have his in absentia removal order rescinded on
grounds of deficient notice.
   According to the Government, having received notice of
the time and date of their removal hearings through a sub-
sequent notice issued per paragraph (2), these noncitizens
cannot show that they “did not receive notice in accord-
ance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a).”
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). Therefore, their removal proceedings
cannot be reopened, or their removal orders rescinded.
Brief for Attorney General 16–17.
   The majority agrees with this reading of the statute,
making three analytical moves to justify its conclusion.
One: It declares that, for purposes of §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), re-
ceipt of either an NTA or a paragraph (2) notice can suffice
to defeat rescission of an in absentia removal order. Ante,
at 8–10. The majority similarly reads §1229a(b)(5)(A), the
in absentia removal provision, to allow a noncitizen to be
removed in absentia after he is provided with either form of
notice. Ante, at 9–10. (But the majority also appears to
realize that, taken “[l]iterally,” this reading would allow a
noncitizen to be removed without recourse whenever he re-
ceives a notice to appear, even if the Government later
changes the hearing date without telling him. Ante, at 12.)
So two: The majority declares that the notice “that matters”
is the one that informed the noncitizen of the time and date
of the hearing he missed. Ibid.; see also ante, at 11 (explain-
ing that, under §1229a(b)(5)(A), “ ‘the written notice’ ” the
Government must provide “is tied to the singular proceed-
ing missed, and at which the alien was ‘removed in absen-
tia’ ”). Thus, three: The majority concludes that, despite the
6                CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                      JACKSON, J., dissenting

Government’s provision of a defective NTA, all the nonciti-
zens here “received a proper paragraph (2) notice for the
hearings they missed and at which they were ordered re-
moved,” so “they cannot seek rescission of their in absentia
removal orders on the basis of defective notice.” Ante, at 2;
see also ante, at 13.
  As I explain in Parts I–B and I–C, infra, the primary
problem with the majority’s statutory analysis is that it un-
justifiably cleaves the paragraph (2) notice from para-
graph (1)’s NTA requirement. In the majority’s view, the
Government can provide the statutorily required notice if it
issues either form of notice to a noncitizen, so long as the
notice the Government provided and the noncitizen re-
ceived corresponds with the hearing the noncitizen missed.
See ante, at 8–12. But this maneuver misreads the plain
text of the statute in at least two critical respects: It ignores
the fact that the statute Congress wrote makes an NTA is-
sued under paragraph (1) indispensable, and, relatedly, it
disregards the obviously supporting and secondary role
that paragraph (2) notices play with respect to this statu-
tory scheme.
                                B
   The text of §1229(a) plainly refutes the majority’s conten-
tion that either an NTA under paragraph (1) or a subse-
quent notice under paragraph (2) suffices because the no-
tice that “matters” for the purpose of in absentia removal is
whichever one corresponds to the missed hearing at which
removal is ordered. Ante, at 12.
   Paragraph (1) unequivocally states that “[i]n removal
proceedings under section 1229a of this title,” an NTA
“shall be given” to the noncitizen. §1229(a)(1) (emphasis
added). An NTA is “the basis for commencing a grave legal
proceeding,” akin to “ ‘an indictment in a criminal case [or]
a complaint in a civil case.’ ” Niz-Chavez, 593 U. S., at 163–
164 (quoting Tr. of Oral Arg. in Pereira v. Sessions, O. T.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           7

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

2017, No. 17–459, p. 39; alteration in original). Nothing in
the text of §1229(a) betrays any hint that paragraph (1)’s
dictates are optional. And the Government does not contest
this; it acknowledges that an NTA under paragraph (1) of
§1229(a) is indispensable because this particular form of
notice is what initiates the removal process as a matter of
law. Tr. of Oral Arg. 49.
  Furthermore, as I mentioned previously, a paragraph (1)
NTA must contain certain specific information, all of which
Congress apparently thought important for a noncitizen
facing removal to have at the outset. §§1229(a)(1)(A)–(G).
Much of the required information is unique to NTAs issued
per paragraph (1). See, e.g., §§1229(a)(1)(C)–(D) (requiring
notice of the “acts or conduct alleged to be in violation of
law” and the “charges against the” noncitizen). Section
1229(a)(1) also treats all of the required information
equally—none of the listed elements is more or less dispen-
sable than any other.
  To be sure, two pieces of information that Congress has
mandated be provided in an NTA—the time and place of a
removal proceeding, §1229(a)(1)(G)(i), and the conse-
quences of failing to appear, §1229(a)(1)(G)(ii)— overlap in
kind with information that must be provided in a para-
graph (2) notice. But that fact does not undermine the man-
datory nature of paragraph (1)’s requirements. We have al-
ready held that an NTA that does not contain the requisite
time-and-place information does not qualify as an NTA at
all. Pereira, 585 U. S., at 202. Nor does an NTA that is
deficient in this way become retroactively transformed into
one that satisfies §1229(a)(1) if the Government backfills
that missing information using a later notice. Niz-Chavez,
593 U. S., at 170. Instead, “the government must issue a
single statutorily compliant document.” Id., at 163.
  The indispensability of a complete NTA issued under par-
agraph (1) has consequences for the reasoning the majority
puts forward here. It means that providing this particular
8               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

form of notice always and inevitably “matters” to the in ab-
sentia removal process, notwithstanding the majority’s ef-
fort to hide that ball by directing our attention to whichever
notice “informed the alien of the time and date of the hear-
ing the alien missed, and at which he was ordered re-
moved”—as if that is the notice that counts under the stat-
ute. Ante, at 12.
  Put another way, whatever “notice in accordance with
paragraph (1) or (2)” might mean in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), if
the Government has to issue an NTA that satisfies para-
graph (1), which it does, that language cannot mean the
Government can choose to provide either a paragraph (1) or
paragraph (2) notice and still be in compliance with the
statute, as the majority suggests. And without that “ei-
ther/or” pillar, the majority’s analysis collapses.
                              C
   The majority’s reasoning further suggests that the indis-
pensability of an NTA per the statute is essentially irrele-
vant because, for rescission purposes, an incomplete NTA
can be cured with a paragraph (2) notice, standing alone.
By its nature, however, a paragraph (2) notice cannot stand
alone. This is apparent on the face of the relevant statutory
provisions, which plainly establish, as the Ninth Circuit
held, that “there can be no valid notice under paragraph (2)
without valid notice under paragraph (1).” 24 F. 4th 1315,
1319 (2022) (case below). Given this, even if we read
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)’s “paragraph (1) or (2)” language to pre-
clude rescission when noncitizens receive either a statuto-
rily compliant NTA under paragraph (1) or a valid hearing
notice under paragraph (2), the noncitizens here did not re-
ceive either one. The majority’s contrary conclusion rests on
a misconception of the nature of the notice that para-
graph (2) requires.
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             9

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

                                 1
    Analogizing to another common situation: A para-
graph (2) notice is the functional equivalent of a change or-
der. See 1A P. Bruner & P. O’Connor, Construction Law
§4:1, p. 282 (2016) (describing a “ ‘change’ ” in the construc-
tion context as “ ‘an alteration to an existing contract re-
quirement concerning work that is already required to be
done’ ”). That is what the plain text of §1229(a)(2) calls for,
and it is how a paragraph (2) notice plainly operates. As-
suming that the Government has complied with its pre-
existing obligation under paragraph (1) to provide written
notice of the noncitizen’s duty to appear at removal proceed-
ings at a particular time and place, paragraph (2) requires
the Government to issue a supplemental notice “specifying
. . . the new time or place of the proceedings” and reiterating
the consequences of failing to attend, if sometime after the
issuance of the NTA the time or place of the scheduled re-
moval hearing changes. §1229(a)(2) (emphasis added).
    The analogy to change orders in the construction context
illuminates the unavoidably interconnected relationship
between a compliant NTA issued under paragraph (1) and
the notice the Government must provide under paragraph
(2). Ask any homebuilder. A customer who wants a new
den, for example, submits a written request to the builder
that specifies the details of her order—e.g., construct a
12- by 12-foot room with two 48-inch fixed picture windows
at a designated spot on the back of her house. Those are
the indispensable terms of the mandate. But, if the cus-
tomer later changes her mind about some aspect of this pro-
ject—say, she wants the windows moved, or she wants the
room enlarged to 16 by 16 feet—she submits a written
change order notifying the builder of those particular alter-
ations. The change order supplements the original request;
it does not entirely supplant it. And the change order su-
persedes only the particular terms of the initial directive
10               CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                       JACKSON, J., dissenting

that have been changed. Consequently, the change order is
only cognizable in relation to what came before.
   So it is here. As the majority concedes, Congress has
mandated that the Government, first, provide noncitizens
with a written NTA that specifically and comprehensively
lists the terms of the removal proceeding mandate. That
notice has to include the time and place of the noticed re-
moval proceeding. §1229(a)(1)(G)(i). Congress has also au-
thorized the Government to make certain adjustments to
that notice under specified circumstances, but only if the
Government similarly provides a written notice of those al-
tered terms. That is the work of a notice issued under par-
agraph (2). And, just as in the construction context, a par-
agraph (2) notice of the changed time or place has no effect
independent of the original directive. A notice of change
under paragraph (2) issues only if there is a changed cir-
cumstance, and it exists merely to update the terms that
were previously set.
                                    2
    Setting aside analogous circumstances and using a dic-
tionary to bear down on the words Congress used in
§1229(a)(2) leads to the same result. As a reminder, para-
graph (2) provides that “[i]n removal proceedings . . . , in the
case of any change or postponement in the time and place of
such proceedings, . . . a written notice shall be given in per-
son” to the noncitizen, and that notice must “specif[y] . . .
the new time or place of the proceedings” and the conse-
quences of failing to attend. §§1229(a)(2)(A)(i)–(ii) (empha-
sis added).
    Homing in on the word “change,” the majority first ac-
cuses the noncitizens of “tak[ing] too narrow a reading of
th[at] term,” since “change” can mean simply “ ‘to replace,’ ”
“ ‘to switch,’ ” “to ‘alter,’ or to ‘modify.’ ” Ante, at 14. As fur-
ther support for this broad interpretation of change, the
majority points to “any”—the provision says “any change”—
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             11

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

which, according to the majority, suggests that Congress
contemplated that the paragraph (1) NTA could omit the
time and place of the removal proceeding, with the para-
graph (2) notice “chang[ing]” that “TBD” to the actual time
and place. Ibid.
   But the modifier “any” does not justify the majority’s
overbroad reading of “change or postponement” in
§1229(a)(2)(A). It is true that “the word ‘any’ has ‘an expan-
sive meaning.’ ” Patel v. Garland, 596 U. S. 328, 338 (2022)
(quoting Babb v. Wilkie, 589 U. S. 399, 405, n. 2 (2020)).
But “any” does work under the noncitizens’ reading of par-
agraph (2), too. It helps cover all potential changes to the
pre-existing time and place that paragraph (1) requires the
Government to designate. Especially when one considers
the entire operative phrase—“any change or postponement
in the time and place of such proceedings”—“any change”
makes clear that notice must also issue when a hearing
time is moved up, or when a venue is switched from one
location to another.
   In any event, the majority does not, and cannot, dispute
that an ordinary meaning of “change” is “the action of re-
placing something with something else of the same kind or
with something that serves as a substitute.” Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 374 (1993). The notice
provisions at issue here reflect that kind of substitution on
their face, because §1229(a) mandates in paragraph (1) that
the Government provide noncitizens with a complete NTA
(with the time and place for the removal proceeding in-
cluded) at the outset. The paragraph (2) notice only comes
into play “in the case of any change . . . in the time and place
of such proceedings.” §1229(a)(2)(A). Thus, among the var-
ious definitional possibilities the majority offers, it is this
definition that makes the most sense of this particular stat-
ute. See Abramski v. United States, 573 U. S. 169, 179, n. 6
(2014) (“[C]ourt[s] should not interpret each word in a stat-
ute with blinders on, refusing to look at the word’s function
12              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

within the broader statutory context”).
  In short, use of the word “change” in the context of a stat-
ute that first requires something—e.g., the setting of a time
and place—presumes the earlier existence of that thing to
be swapped out. The ordinary meaning of “postponement,”
too, requires the previous selection of a particular date or
time. See Webster’s Third New International Dictionary,
at 1773 (defining “postpone” as “to hold back to a later
time”). And the word “new” runs in the same circles. “New”
can mean “other than the former or old.” Id., at 1522. So a
“new” time likewise implies the earlier existence of an “old”
time.
  Thus, dictionary definitions indicate that in order for a
notice issued under paragraph (2) to “change” the time or
place of a proceeding to a “new” time or place, there must
have been an old time or place to begin with. If the NTA
did not comply with the statute in this way, then it is im-
possible for paragraph (2) notice to comply, either.
                              3
  Even so, definitions alone often “do not equip us to re-
solve” a case. Kucana v. Holder, 558 U. S. 233, 245 (2010).
We have long understood that words with “ ‘many diction-
ary definitions . . . must draw [their] meaning[s] from . . .
context.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Ardestani v. INS, 502 U. S. 129,
135 (1991)). “[S]tatutes must be read as a whole,” and, here,
notice under paragraph (2) “does not exist in a vacuum.”
Guam v. United States, 593 U. S. 310, 316 (2021) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
  That brings me back to where I started—with the obser-
vation that, when read in context, paragraph (2) requires a
preceding written notice (like a standard change order does)
and thus presupposes a compliant NTA. Not to belabor the
point, but it bears noting that all the relevant context clues
support this reading of the statute.
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                     13

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

   For example, notice under paragraph (2) follows the re-
quired NTA under paragraph (1) in the text of the statute.
See §1229(a). This ordering suggests the central role of
NTAs in Congress’s removal scheme, with paragraph (2) no-
tices playing only a supporting part. Moreover, while par-
agraph (2) notices can and do work together with NTAs to
convey essential information to noncitizens, they are hardly
a team of equals. Also, a paragraph (2) notice, which con-
tains far less content than an NTA, is patently supple-
mental insofar as it may not ever need to be issued. See
§1229(a)(2)(A).
   The majority errs in interpreting “notice in accordance
with paragraph (1) or (2),” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), by treating
“or” as a standard disjunctive construct. See ante, at 8–9.
That might generally be so. But here, the word “or” simply
cannot be taken to mean that either notice in accordance
with paragraph (1) or in accordance with paragraph (2) suf-
fices under the statute because those two notices are by no
means equivalent alternatives, as I have explained.2
   It is clear on the face of this statute, then, that a para-
graph (2) notice merely alters information that Congress
has required be given previously, and, “especially when
properly read in sequence as integral parts of a whole,” the
statute plainly “anticipates a predicate” NTA that complies
with Congress’s mandate. Guam, 593 U. S., at 317 (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). As its “text and place within
[the] comprehensive statutory scheme” show, id., at 320, a
notice under paragraph (2) cannot exist in the absence of a
compliant NTA. The statute simply does not contemplate
——————
  2 Considered in context, the word “or” in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) actually re-

inforces both the centrality of an NTA and the conditional nature of a
paragraph (2) notice. Recall that a paragraph (2) notice is required only
in the event of a change or postponement of the removal proceeding.
§1229(a)(2). The “or” in “paragraph (1) or (2)” thus expresses—in a way
that “and” could not—that a notice under paragraph (2) will sometimes,
but not always, be required.
14              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

it.
                               II
   Our precedents in Pereira and Niz-Chavez addressed the
relevant notice provisions and what they require of the Gov-
ernment, yet the majority barely pauses to acknowledge
this. Both Pereira and Niz-Chavez concerned noncitizens’
eligibility for a form of discretionary relief called cancella-
tion of removal and the operation of the so-called stop-time
rule. See §§1229b(b)(1), (d)(1)(A). Noncitizens who have
accrued 10 years of continuous physical presence in the
United States may be eligible for cancellation of removal,
but under the stop-time rule, that period of continuous
physical presence ends when the noncitizen “is served a no-
tice to appear under section 1229(a).” Ibid. Then as now,
the Government had failed to send noncitizens NTAs that
included time-and-place information as §1229(a)(1) re-
quires.
   In Pereira, we held that “[a] notice that does not inform a
noncitizen when and where to appear for removal proceed-
ings is not a ‘notice to appear under section 1229(a)’ and
therefore does not trigger the stop-time rule.” 585 U. S., at
202. In Niz-Chavez, we rejected the Government’s view
that a deficient paragraph (1) NTA is “complete and the
stop-time rule kicks in whenever [the Government] finishes
delivering all the statutorily prescribed information.” 593
U. S., at 160. Rather, we said, the Government needs to
supply noncitizens with a single, fully compliant NTA if it
wishes to take advantage of the stop-time rule. Id., at 172.
   In both of those cases, we interpreted the notice regime
just as the noncitizens do here. As the majority acknowl-
edges, ante, at 15, we specifically observed in Pereira that,
“[b]y allowing for a ‘change or postponement’ of the proceed-
ings to a ‘new time or place,’ paragraph (2) presumes that
the Government has already served a ‘notice to appear un-
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           15

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

der section 1229(a)’ that specified a time and place as re-
quired by §1229(a)(1)(G)(i).” 585 U. S., at 210. “Otherwise,”
we said, “there would be no time or place to ‘change or post-
pone.’ ” Ibid. (alteration omitted). We thought then that
the Government could only “exercise that statutory author-
ity after it has served a notice to appear specifying the time
and place of the removal proceedings.” Id., at 218 (empha-
sis added).
   In Niz-Chavez, we doubled down. We recognized that
“Congress expressly contemplated [the] possibility” that the
Government would “issu[e] notices to appear with all the
information §1229(a)(1) requires—and then amen[d] the
time or place information if circumstances required it” us-
ing §1229(a)(2). 593 U. S., at 159. We explained that “once
the government serves a compliant notice to appear, [the
statute] permits it to send a supplemental notice amending
the time and place of an alien’s hearing if logistics require
a change.” Id., at 170 (emphasis added). We also suggested
that an alternative reading would effectively nullify Con-
gress’s work to change the notice regime from one permit-
ting the Government to specify the time and place for a
noncitizen’s hearing “ ‘in the order to show cause or other-
wise,’ ” to one where “time and place information must be
included in a notice to appear, not ‘or otherwise.’ ” Id., at
167 (quoting §1252b(a)(2)(A) (1994 ed.); emphasis in origi-
nal). That point is as salient now as it was then.
   Our statements in Pereira and Niz-Chavez demonstrate
that the Court twice before thought obvious the reading of
the statute the noncitizens here propose. Yet the majority
now cries dicta. The Court says the meaning of §1229(a)(2)
was not at issue in Pereira, which concerned the “ ‘narrow
question’ ” of the operation of the stop-time rule. Ante, at
15. To be sure, “we are not necessarily bound by dicta
should more complete argument demonstrate that the dicta
is not correct.” Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 568
16                 CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                        JACKSON, J., dissenting

U. S. 519, 548 (2013). Here, however, “more complete argu-
ment” has served only to confirm our previous statements.
   The argument the majority accepts today brushes aside
what we said in Pereira without explaining why our state-
ments—which are due a modicum of respect in any event,
see Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 399 (1821)—were
mistaken. Addressing Niz-Chavez in only a footnote, the
majority maintains that our observation that paragraph (2)
notices allow the Government to change a “chosen time and
place in the NTA . . . remains true even if there are other
instances in which paragraph (2) notices may issue.” Ante,
at 16, n. 1. But that assertion simply fails to engage with
the antecedent point—that Congress expected the Govern-
ment to issue compliant NTAs first—and the implications
it has for the interpretation of §1229(a)(2).
   And, in the end, we were not wrong. Under the uncom-
plicated statutory reading that Pereira and Niz-Chavez en-
dorsed, the noncitizens here are not precluded from seeking
rescission of their in absentia removal orders, because
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) permits “a motion to reopen [removal
proceedings] filed at any time” if the noncitizen can demon-
strate that he “did not receive notice in accordance with
paragraph (1) or (2)” of §1229(a). Neither form of notice was
provided under the circumstances presented here. As all
agree, none of the noncitizens ever received a notice in ac-
cordance with paragraph (1). See Pereira, 585 U. S., at 202.
And because a paragraph (2) notice presumes a statutorily
compliant paragraph (1) notice, none of the noncitizens re-
ceived notice in accordance with paragraph (2), either. That
is true no matter how many would-be paragraph (2) notices
the Government sent.3


——————
  3 By the same logic, the Government should not have been able to ob-

tain the noncitizens’ in absentia removal orders under §1229a(b)(5)(A) in
the first place.
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           17

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

                             III
  One final flaw bears mentioning. By snipping the thread
that connects the notices Congress required in para-
graphs (1) and (2) of §1229(a), today’s decision mangles the
broader statutory scheme.
                                A
   The long and short of this critique is that reading the
statute in the way the majority does fails to fully account
for Congress’s objectives when it comes to removal proce-
dures, which have long included ensuring that noncitizens
facing removal receive notice. The Government’s statutory
obligation to provide notice in the removal context has been
a crucial aspect of federal immigration policy since at least
the early 1950s. To this end, the Immigration and Nation-
ality Act (INA) of 1952 specifically provided that a nonciti-
zen must be “given a reasonable opportunity to be present
at [the] proceeding” in which his deportability or remova-
bility is to be determined. §242(b), 66 Stat. 209, codified at
8 U. S. C. §1252(b) (1952 ed.). With respect to in absentia
removal, the INA further provided that if the noncitizen
“without reasonable cause fail[ed] or refuse[d] to attend or
remain in attendance,” a “special inquiry officer” could “pro-
ceed to a determination in like manner as if the alien were
present.” Ibid.
   Notably, at that time, an immigration officer’s decision to
remove a noncitizen in absentia was discretionary. Ibid. In
1990, however, Congress amended the INA to provide, in
certain circumstances, for mandatory in absentia deporta-
tion of noncitizens who failed to appear for their proceed-
ings. See Immigration Act of 1990, §545(a), 104 Stat. 5061–
5065, codified at 8 U. S. C. §1252b(c)(1) (1994 ed.). None-
theless, the Government still routinely encountered “[p]ro-
cedural [i]ssues” in its efforts to remove inadmissible or de-
portable noncitizens. H. R. Rep. No. 104–469, pt. 1, p. 122
(1996). Those issues included deportable or inadmissible
18                  CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                          JACKSON, J., dissenting

noncitizens sometimes “frustrat[ing] removal through tak-
ing advantage of certain procedural loopholes” in the pro-
cess. For example, some noncitizens facing removal would
“simply fail to appear for their deportation hearing,” and
“some immigration judges . . . decline[d] to exercise their
authority to order an alien deported in absentia” due to
“lapses (perceived or genuine) in the procedures for notify-
ing aliens of deportation proceedings.” Ibid.4
   Congress endeavored to address these kinds of problems,
among other things, when it established the mandatory in
absentia removal provisions that govern these cases as part
of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Respon-
sibility Act (IIRIRA) of 1996. See §304(a), 110 Stat. 3009–
587 to 3009–590; see also 8 U. S. C. §§1229(a), 1229a. No-
tably, however, Congress did not absolve the Government
of its obligation to provide notice of removal proceedings.
Nor did it make receipt of notice irrelevant to whether a
noncitizen who does not show up to his hearing can later
contest his removal. To the contrary, notice features prom-
inently in IIRIRA’s in absentia removal process—it is spe-
cifically mentioned in four of the five statutory subdivisions
that constitute Congress’s in absentia mandatory removal
directives.5 And, rather than devising a process in which a
——————
   4 This Court has previously described the notice regime of that era. For

example, the Government back then initiated removal proceedings by is-
suing a written notice called an “ ‘order to show cause.’ ” Niz-Chavez v.
Garland, 593 U. S. 157, 167 (2021). By statute, the Government was
permitted to specify the time and place for a noncitizen’s hearing “ ‘in the
order to show cause or otherwise.’ ” Ibid. (citing 8 U. S. C. §1252b(a)(2)(A)
(1994 ed.); emphasis in original). But this statutory language provided
flexibility, and meant that “orders to show cause did not necessarily in-
clude time-and-place information.” Pereira v. Sessions, 585 U. S. 198,
214, n. 9 (2018).
   5 See §1229a(b)(5)(A) (authorizing in absentia removal only for noncit-

izens who have been provided “written notice required under paragraph
(1) or (2) of section 1229(a)”); (B) (requiring “[n]o written notice” before
in absentia removal if a noncitizen failed to provide his address); (C) (per-
mitting motions to reopen at any time if a noncitizen demonstrates that
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                       19

                          JACKSON, J., dissenting

noncitizen who misses his hearing must be removed regard-
less, Congress has made clear that the consequences for
failing to appear for scheduled removal proceedings can
turn on whether notice was provided, or received, under the
terms of the statute. See, e.g., §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).
                               B
   The resulting in absentia removal scheme constitutes a
balancing of interests and obligations that is well within
Congress’s policy prerogatives. Congress has also clearly
expressed its intent in this regard, for when paragraphs (1)
and (2) of §1229(a) are read naturally, in context, and with
an understanding of Congress’s objectives, the entire
scheme flows seamlessly.
   To recap: If the Government issues, and the noncitizen
receives, the statutorily required notice—i.e., the notice
mandated by paragraph (1) of §1229(a), or, when necessary,
by paragraphs (1) and (2)—yet the noncitizen fails to ap-
pear at the scheduled removal proceeding, she is subject to
a mandatory, nonrescindable removal order. But if the
Government fails to provide notice in accordance with the
statute, the in absentia removal order is subject to recon-
sideration, meaning that, upon request, the noncitizen’s re-
moval proceedings may be reopened.6
   This symmetry of notice-related mandates and accounta-
bility incentivizes both noncitizens and the Government to
follow Congress’s dictates. It also facilitates efficient re-
moval of deportable and inadmissible noncitizens while
——————
he “did not receive notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of sec-
tion 1229(a)”); (D) (limiting judicial review to, inter alia, the “validity of
the notice provided to the” noncitizen).
   6 It is far from clear that rescission is automatic under the statute. See

§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) (providing that “[s]uch an order may be rescinded”
(emphasis added)). Relevant regulations, too, give an immigration judge
“discretion to deny a motion to reopen even if the moving party has es-
tablished a prima facie case for relief.” 8 CFR §1003.23(b)(3) (2022). But
that question is not before the Court.
20              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

simultaneously preserving the fairness and procedural in-
tegrity of the removal process in individual cases. The ma-
jority’s interpretation, which basically amounts to a refusal
to accept these policy choices, supplants this dual objective.
   Indeed, and perhaps most concerning, under the major-
ity’s reading of the statutory provisions at issue here, Con-
gress’s goals are plainly thwarted, for a noncitizen may be
removed in absentia even if the Government fails to provide
him with information that complies in both form and sub-
stance with Congress’s commands. The removal scheme’s
orderly progression actually breaks down when the Govern-
ment fails, in systemic fashion, to send statutorily compli-
ant NTAs. And for years, that is exactly what has hap-
pened, because the NTAs that the Government routinely
issued lacked the time, date, or place of a noncitizen’s initial
removal hearing. Brief for Attorney General 50.
   Rather than just complying with §1229(a)’s notice re-
quirements, the Government now urges us to interpret
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) to preclude reopening of certain in ab-
sentia removal proceedings, out of a worry that “hundreds
of thousands” of individuals who have “been ordered re-
moved in absentia would be able to undo those orders” un-
der the noncitizens’ reading of the statute. Ibid. But this
is a problem of the Government’s own making. And it is
completely within the Government’s power to fix. At the
very least, it seems wildly counterintuitive for this Court to
adopt the Government’s permissive reading of the statute—
in contravention of its plain text—so as to help the Govern-
ment avoid the prescribed consequences of its chronic non-
compliance with Congress’s mandates.
   There is also no rational limiting principle. Today, the
Government opts to omit from the NTA the time and date
of the removal proceeding. The majority now says that’s no
problem—the Government may nevertheless seek and re-
ceive binding in absentia removal so long as the noncitizen
received a paragraph (2) notice that filled in the blanks. See
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           21

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

ante, at 10–11, 13. But what prevents the Government
from removing a noncitizen whose notice to appear is defi-
cient in other critical respects? The “next chapter in the
same story,” Niz-Chavez, 593 U. S., at 159, might involve a
noncitizen whose notice to appear also failed to inform her
that she can be represented by counsel in removal proceed-
ings. See §1229(a)(1)(E). That information is required only
in paragraph (1) notices, not paragraph (2) notices. By the
majority’s logic, a noncitizen in that position could be or-
dered removed in absentia and barred from seeking rescis-
sion of her order without ever being informed of her ability
to be represented by an attorney. Even the Government
has conceded that nothing in its reading of the statute pre-
vents that outcome. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 17–21, 50–51.
   One can imagine other troubling scenarios; for example,
a notice to appear that omits the charges against a nonciti-
zen. See §1229(a)(1)(D). That information, too, is required
only in a paragraph (1) notice. If a noncitizen receives such
a defective NTA followed by a purported paragraph (2) no-
tice and fails to attend her hearing, may she be removed in
absentia having never learned the charges against her?
The Government assures us that statutory safeguards pre-
vent that outcome at the very least. It says that in those
circumstances, it could not satisfy its burden of proving to
an immigration judge by “ ‘clear, unequivocal, and convinc-
ing evidence’ ” that the noncitizen is removable. Reply Brief
23 (quoting §1229a(b)(5)(A)). But what if the removal hear-
ing is held in absentia, and the Government simply informs
the immigration judge of the charges against the noncitizen
at that time? Would it matter that the absent noncitizen
was kept completely in the dark about the charges? The
majority gives no answer, other than that noncitizens
“could have raised [this issue] in a hearing that they chose
to skip.” Ante, at 16.
   The majority waves away these legitimate concerns about
how far the Government can go in deviating from what
22              CAMPOS-CHAVES v. GARLAND

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

§1229(a)(1) or (2) requires, by blithely declaring that to-
day’s decision does not “free” the Government of its obliga-
tion to provide a compliant NTA. Ibid. But it is hard to
square that statement with what is actually happening on
the ground. The Government has already flouted its NTA
obligation for years now. Though the Court might not be
expressly authorizing this state of affairs, today’s blunting
of the statutory consequence for the Government’s systemic
failure to comply with §1229(a) removes any possible incen-
tive for the Government to change course now.
   Finally, the majority says that a noncitizen who receives
a noncompliant NTA followed by a paragraph (2) notice can
always “attend the hearing” to protest the deficient NTA.
Ibid. That is entirely beside the point. Congress put the
burden on the Government to send complete NTAs to
noncitizens facing removal every time it initiates a removal
proceeding. Instead of requiring the Government to shoul-
der that burden, the majority effectively shifts it onto the
noncitizens—individuals perhaps unfamiliar with this
country and its laws—tasking them with the responsibility
of addressing the Government’s mistakes. That is not the
statute Congress wrote.
                        *     *    *
  When the Government issues an NTA under para-
graph (1) that lacks time and date information but follows
up with a notice under paragraph (2) that sets the time and
date of a removal hearing that the noncitizen subsequently
misses, I fully understand the instinct to conclude that the
Government’s initial lack of compliance was insignificant.
Some might even think it unfair that noncitizens could seek
rescission of their removal orders based on an initial notice
that seems only technically defective, given the Govern-
ment’s subsequent action. My response to them is simple:
Congress thought otherwise. The statute it wrote specifi-
cally establishes the what, when, and how of the notice that
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           23

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

is due to noncitizens facing removal. The statute also al-
lows noncitizens who have been ordered removed in absen-
tia to seek rescission of the removal order if the required
notice is not received. I can no more judge that policy deci-
sion than I can change it. Today, the Court makes the un-
fortunate mistake of doing both.