Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)           1




SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 25A103
                         _________________


    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
          AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
              ASSOCIATION, ET AL.
                ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                       [August 21, 2025]

   The application for stay presented to JUSTICE JACKSON
and by her referred to the Court is granted in part and
denied in part.
   The application is granted as to the District Court’s
judgments vacating the Government’s termination of
various research-related grants. See Department of Ed. v.
California, 604 U. S. ___ (2025) (per curiam).         The
Administrative Procedure Act’s “limited waiver of
[sovereign] immunity” does not provide the District Court
with jurisdiction to adjudicate claims “based on” the
research-related grants or to order relief designed to
enforce any “ ‘obligation to pay money’ ” pursuant to those
grants. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 2). And while the loss of
money is not typically considered irreparable harm, that
changes if the funds “cannot be recouped” and are thus
“irrevocably expended.” Philip Morris USA Inc. v. Scott,
561 U. S. 1301, 1304 (2010) (Scalia, J., in chambers). The
Government faces such harm here. The plaintiffs do not
state that they will repay grant money if the Government
ultimately prevails. Moreover, the plaintiffs’ contention
that they lack the resources to continue their research
projects without federal funding is inconsistent with the
proposition that they have the resources to make the
Government whole for money already spent.
   The application is otherwise denied.
2      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   BARRETT, J., concurring

   Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the June 23, 2025 order of the
United States District Court for the District of
Massachusetts, case No. 1:25–cv–10787, and paragraph II
of the June 23, 2025 order of the United States District
Court for the District of Massachusetts, case No. 1:25–cv–
10814, are stayed pending the disposition of the appeal in
the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit and
disposition of a petition for a writ of certiorari, if such a writ
is timely sought. Should certiorari be denied, this stay shall
terminate automatically. In the event certiorari is granted,
the stay shall terminate upon the issuance of the judgment
of the Court. The Government may raise its arguments as
to the remainder of the District Court’s judgments in the
ordinary course.
   THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, JUSTICE
KAGAN, and JUSTICE JACKSON would deny the application
in full.
   JUSTICE THOMAS, JUSTICE ALITO, JUSTICE GORSUCH, and
JUSTICE KAVANAUGH would grant the application in full.
   JUSTICE BARRETT, concurring in the partial grant of the
application for stay.
   In recent months, the National Institutes of Health has
worked to align its funding with changed policy priorities
mandated by a series of executive orders. See Exec. Order
No. 14151, 90 Fed. Reg. 8339 (2025); Exec. Order
No. 14168, 90 Fed. Reg. 8615 (2025); Exec. Order
No. 14173, 90 Fed. Reg. 8633 (2025). NIH issued internal
guidance documents describing those priorities: Going
forward, the agency will not fund research related to DEI
objectives, gender identity, or COVID–19. Nor will it
continue the practice of awarding grants to researchers
based on race. After review, NIH issued numerous
decisions terminating existing grants, and various
plaintiffs sued, challenging the guidance documents and
their    individual     grant    terminations under            the
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                     BARRETT, J., concurring

Administrative Procedure Act. The District Court declared
unlawful and vacated both the guidance and the individual
terminations, and the First Circuit denied the
Government’s request for a stay. Both courts treated NIH’s
termination of grants and its issuance of guidance as
distinct agency actions. The Government sought a stay
from this Court.
   As today’s order states, the District Court likely lacked
jurisdiction to hear challenges to the grant terminations,
which belong in the Court of Federal Claims (CFC). See
Department of Ed. v. California, 604 U. S. ___ (2025)
(per curiam). In my view, however, the Government is not
entitled to a stay of the judgments insofar as they vacate
the guidance documents.
   Plaintiffs frequently seek vacatur of internal agency
guidance on arbitrary-and-capricious grounds in district
court or directly in the D. C. Circuit. See, e.g., Ciox Health,
LLC v. Azar, 435 F. Supp. 3d 30 (DDC 2020) (challenge to
HHS guidance); POET Biorefining, LLC v. EPA, 970 F. 3d
392 (CADC 2020) (challenge to EPA guidance). That the
agency guidance discusses internal policies related to
grants does not transform a challenge to that guidance into
a claim “founded . . . upon” contract that only the CFC can
hear. 28 U. S. C. §1491(a)(1). So the District Court was
likely correct to conclude that it had jurisdiction to
entertain an APA challenge to the guidance, and it would
be confusing for our disposition of this application to
suggest that the CFC is the right forum for that claim.
   THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE JACKSON maintain that
because the District Court is the right forum for the
challenge to the guidance, it is necessarily also the right
forum for the challenge to the grant terminations. Post, at
1 (ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part); post, at 14–16 (JACKSON, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part). Both logic and law, however, support
channeling challenges to the grant terminations and
4       NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                   PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                    BARRETT, J., concurring

guidance to different forums. First, logic: Vacating the
guidance does not reinstate terminated grants. If one
simply flowed from the other, the District Court would have
needed only to vacate the guidance itself. Cf. Bowen v.
Massachusetts, 487 U. S. 879, 910 (1988) (one judgment
vacating HHS decision). Here, by contrast, the District
Court separately “vacated” the grant terminations and
ordered the Government to pay plaintiffs sums due under
the agreements “forthwith.” App. to Application 160a.
Second, law: Even if the guidance and grant terminations
are linked, vacating the guidance does not necessarily void
decisions made under it, as the First Circuit recognized.
145 F. 4th 39, 50 (CA1 2025); see also, e.g., D. A. M. v. Barr,
486 F. Supp. 3d 404, 415 (DDC 2020) (vacatur does not
necessarily “eras[ e] from legal existence all past
adjudications under the vacated rule”). The claims are
legally distinct. And if the CFC has exclusive jurisdiction
over the grant terminations, see California, 604 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 2), the plaintiffs cannot end-run that limit
simply by packaging them with a challenge to agency
guidance.1
  Two-track litigation results from “[t]he jurisdictional
scheme governing actions against the United States,” which
“often requires . . . plaintiffs to file two actions in different
courts to obtain complete relief in connection with one set
of facts.” United States v. Tohono O’odham Nation, 563
U. S. 307, 323 (2011) (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in
judgment); see also ibid. (stating that a claim seeking “to
——————
   1 Nor is JUSTICE JACKSON correct to say that this approach leaves the

plaintiffs without any prospect of relief. Post, at 14–15. Each forum has
the authority to fully adjudicate the claims over which it has jurisdiction.
If the CFC concludes that the Government breached a grant agreement,
it may award relief to the grantee. If a district court decides that agency
guidance violates the APA, it may vacate the guidance, preventing the
agency from using it going forward. JUSTICE JACKSON’s fundamental
objection is to sending the grant-termination claims to the CFC, but
California already addressed that question.
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                       5

                         BARRETT, J., concurring

set aside agency action must proceed in district court, but a
claim that the same agency action constitutes a taking of
property requiring just compensation must proceed in the
CFC”).      True, plaintiffs cannot necessarily sue the
government in two forums simultaneously. As JUSTICE
JACKSON notes, 28 U. S. C. §1500 bars CFC jurisdiction
over claims pending in other courts when those claims arise
from “ ‘substantially the same operative facts.’ ” Post, at 15,
n. 4.    If the challenges to the guidance and grant
terminations have the requisite factual overlap—and I am
not sure that they do—the plaintiffs will have to proceed
sequentially rather than simultaneously. But we have
previously explained that the statutory scheme puts
plaintiffs to precisely this choice, Tohono O’odham Nation,
563 U. S., at 316–317, and we have rejected the argument
that it is unfair to require plaintiffs “to choose between
partial remedies available in different courts,” id., at 316.
Suits against the United States are “available by grace and
not by right,” and the relief available is subject to the
conditions Congress sets. Id., at 317. Because of those
conditions, my preliminary judgment is that the plaintiffs’
challenges to the grant terminations belong in the CFC, and
their APA challenges to the guidance belong in district
court.
  Of course, whether claims about the guidance in this case
will succeed is another question. It is not obvious, for
instance, that NIH’s guidance is final agency action. Yet
the Government did not press this argument—or any
other—in its stay application.2 Instead, its application
largely ignores the guidance, which suggests that this
——————
  2 Citing stray references to the guidance, JUSTICE KAVANAUGH draws a

different conclusion. Post, at 1–2 (opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part). I respectfully disagree with his reading of the filings.
In my view, the Government plainly raised merits-based arguments
regarding the grant terminations, not the guidance. See Application 29–
34.
6     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                  BARRETT, J., concurring

aspect of the judgments causes it no irreparable harm. The
Government has therefore failed to show that it is entitled
to a stay of the judgments insofar as they vacate the
guidance. Of course, it remains free to challenge the
District Court’s vacatur of the guidance before the First
Circuit.
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

                    Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 25A103
                          _________________


    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
          AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
              ASSOCIATION, ET AL.
                 ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                        [August 21, 2025]

   CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, with whom JUSTICE
SOTOMAYOR, JUSTICE KAGAN, and JUSTICE JACKSON join,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
   In my view, the District Court’s vacatur of the challenged
directives distinguishes this case from Department of Ed. v.
California, 604 U. S. ___ (2025) (per curiam). This relief—
which has prospective and generally applicable
implications beyond the reinstatement of specific grants—
falls well within the scope of the District Court’s
jurisdiction under the Administrative Procedure Act, 5
U. S. C. §701 et seq. And if the District Court had
jurisdiction to vacate the directives, it also had jurisdiction
to vacate the “Resulting Grant Terminations.” App. to
Application 148a–152a. The Government has neither
contended that the terminations did not result from the
directives, nor contested the District Court’s conclusion
that the directives constituted final agency action. To the
contrary, it has taken the position that the District Court’s
two remedies are “inseparable,” Reply 5, and that the
directives set forth “a uniform policy” that was
“implement[ed] . . . globally,” Application 33. In such
circumstances, the District Court was not “required . . . to
split [the case] into two parts.” Bowen v. Massachusetts,
487 U. S. 879, 911 (1988).
                 Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                    Opinion of GORSUCH, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 25A103
                         _________________


    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
          AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
              ASSOCIATION, ET AL.
                 ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                       [August 21, 2025]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH, with whom JUSTICE KAVANAUGH
joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
   Lower court judges may sometimes disagree with this
Court’s decisions, but they are never free to defy them. In
Department of Ed. v. California, 604 U. S. ___ (2025)
(per curiam), this Court granted a stay because it found the
government likely to prevail in showing that the district
court lacked jurisdiction to order the government to pay
grant obligations. California explained that “suits based on
‘any express or implied contract with the United States’ ” do
not belong in district court under the Administrative Proce-
dure Act (APA), but in the Court of Federal Claims under
the Tucker Act. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 2) (quoting 28
U. S. C. §1491(a)(1)). Rather than follow that direction, the
district court in this case permitted a suit involving mate-
rially identical grants to proceed to final judgment under
the APA. As support for its course, the district court in-
voked the “persuasive authority” of “the dissent[s] in Cali-
fornia” and an earlier court of appeals decision California
repudiated. Massachusetts v. Kennedy, ___ F. Supp. 3d ___,
___ (Mass. 2025), App. to Application 232a (App.). That was
error. “[U]nless we wish anarchy to prevail within the fed-
eral judicial system, a precedent of this Court must be fol-
lowed by the lower federal courts no matter how misguided
2      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of GORSUCH, J.

the judges of those courts may think it to be.” Hutto v. Da-
vis, 454 U. S. 370, 375 (1982) (per curiam).
   In casting California aside, the district court stressed
that the Court there granted only interim relief pending ap-
peal and a writ of certiorari and did not issue a final judg-
ment on the merits. ___ F. Supp. 3d, at ___, App. 229a.
True enough. But this Court often addresses requests for
interim relief—sometimes pending a writ of certiorari, as in
California, and sometimes after a writ of certiorari is
granted, as in Mahmoud v. Taylor, 606 U. S. ___ (2025), and
Free Speech Coalition, Inc. v. Paxton, 606 U. S. ___ (2025).
And either way, when this Court issues a decision, it con-
stitutes a precedent that commands respect in lower courts.
   Of course, decisions regarding interim relief are not nec-
essarily “conclusive as to the merits” because further litiga-
tion may follow. Trump v. Boyle, 606 U. S. ___ (2025) (slip
op., at 1). But regardless of a decision’s procedural posture,
its “reasoning—its ratio decidendi”—carries precedential
weight in “future cases.” Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U. S. 83,
104 (2020) (opinion of GORSUCH, J.); see also Bucklew v.
Precythe, 587 U. S. 119, 136 (2019) (“[J]ust as binding as [a]
holding is the reasoning underlying it”). And California’s
reasoning was clear. There, the Court explained that “the
APA’s limited waiver of immunity does not extend to orders
to enforce a contractual obligation to pay money . . . . In-
stead, the Tucker Act grants the Court of Federal Claims
jurisdiction over suits based on any express or implied con-
tract with the United States.” 604 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
2) (internal quotation marks omitted). That reasoning
binds lower courts as a matter of vertical stare decisis.
   Moreover, even probabilistic holdings—such as Califor-
nia’s top-line conclusion that “the Government is likely to
succeed in showing the District Court lacked jurisdiction to
order the payment of money under the APA,” id., at ___–___
(slip op., at 1–2)—must “inform how a [lower] court” pro-
ceeds “in like cases,’’ Boyle, 606 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 1).
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                     Opinion of GORSUCH, J.

If nothing else, the promise of our legal system that like
cases are treated alike means that a lower court ought not
invoke the “persuasive authority” of a dissent or a repudi-
ated court of appeals decision to reach a different conclusion
on an equivalent record. ___ F. Supp. 3d, at ___, App. 232a.
   To be sure, beyond expressing mere disagreement with
California, the district court also sought to distinguish it.
But that effort failed too. This case, the district court as-
serted, is “somewhat different” from California because the
“only claim” there concerned the denial of “previously
awarded discretionary grants.” ___ F. Supp. 3d, at ___,
App. 228a (internal quotation marks omitted). But the
same holds true here. The only injury the district court
sought to remedy in its judgments stems from the govern-
ment’s denial of previously awarded discretionary grants.
Accordingly, California controls.
   Perhaps sensing the problems with the district court’s ap-
proach, the court of appeals tried to distinguish California
in still two other ways. First, the court of appeals suggested
that the district court had not invoked the APA to order the
government to pay money in defiance of California, but in-
stead invoked the APA only to vacate the government’s de-
cision to terminate respondents’ grants. 145 F. 4th 39, 51
(CA1 2025). This Court’s precedents, however, cannot be so
easily circumvented. An order vacating the government’s
decision to terminate grants under the APA is in every
meaningful sense an order requiring the government to pay
those grants. Even the district court recognized as much,
instructing the government that its “vacation of ” the grant
terminations should “result in forthwith . . . disbursement
of funds” pursuant to the grants. App. 160a–161a. Second,
the court of appeals asserted that, unlike in California, the
claims here do not “depen[d] on the terms and conditions of
the grant awards.” 145 F. 4th, at 52. But that is also incor-
rect. In both cases, respondents’ injury and alleged right to
payment stem from the government’s refusal to pay
4       NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                   PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                    Opinion of GORSUCH, J.

promised grants according to the terms and conditions that
accompany them.1
   For these reasons, I concur in the Court’s decision to stay
the district court’s judgments vacating the grant termina-
tions. If the district court’s failure to abide by California
were a one-off, perhaps it would not be worth writing to ad-
dress it. But two months ago another district court tried to
“compel compliance” with a different “order that this Court
ha[d] stayed.”       Department of Homeland Security v.
D. V. D., 606 U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (KAGAN, J., concurring)
(slip op., at 1). Still another district court recently diverged
from one of this Court’s decisions even though the case at
hand did not differ “in any pertinent respect” from the one
this Court had decided. Boyle, 606 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
1). So this is now the third time in a matter of weeks this
Court has had to intercede in a case “squarely controlled”
by one of its precedents. Ibid. All these interventions
should have been unnecessary, but together they under-
score a basic tenet of our judicial system: Whatever their
own views, judges are duty-bound to respect “the hierarchy
of the federal court system created by the Constitution and
Congress.” Hutto, 454 U. S., at 375.2
——————
   1 JUSTICE JACKSON’s dissent suggests that individuals enjoy a free-

floating “right” under the APA to ensure the government “engage[s] in
reasoned decisionmaking.” Post, at 13, 16. But that, too, is mistaken.
To sue under the APA, a litigant must “suffe[r] legal wrong because of
agency action.” 5 U. S. C. §702. And here, the alleged legal wrong the
district court sought to remedy was the government’s failure to pay
promised grants, a point the dissent itself elsewhere acknowledges. See
post, at 13, n. 2 (observing that respondents’ “injury and right to payment
actually stem from the Government’s allegedly arbitrary and capricious
termination of their grant funding” (emphasis in original)).
   2 I would also have stayed the remainder of the district court’s judg-

ments, which vacated internal agency guidance. The only injury that
gave respondents standing to obtain that relief was the termination of
pre-existing grants. See Application 25–26; Reply 4–5; post, at 15 (JACK-
SON, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). True, respondents in
this case also asserted injuries from the guidance based on the
                     Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                   5

                        Opinion of GORSUCH, J.




——————
government’s alleged failure to process new grant applications. But the
district court declined to pass on those allegations, and they therefore
cannot provide a basis for the judgments. See Application 25–26; ___
F. Supp. 3d ___, ___ (Mass. 2025), App. 208a; App. to Respondent States’
Opposition 105a–106a. So all claims on which the district court rendered
judgment were “based on” respondents’ contracts with the government,
and those judgments were thus entered without jurisdiction. California,
604 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2).
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                   Opinion of KAVANAUGH, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 25A103
                          _________________


    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
          AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
              ASSOCIATION, ET AL.
                 ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                        [August 21, 2025]

   JUSTICE KAVANAUGH, concurring in part and dissenting
in part.
   Like JUSTICES THOMAS, ALITO, and GORSUCH, I would
grant the Government’s application for an interim stay in
full.
   First, I agree with the Government (and the Court) that
plaintiffs’ claims challenging NIH’s grant terminations
likely belong in the Court of Federal Claims, not in federal
district court. This Court previously indicated as much in
the interim order in Department of Ed. v. California, 604
U. S. ___ (2025) (per curiam).             The reason is
straightforward: The core of plaintiffs’ suit alleges that the
Government unlawfully terminated their grants. That is a
breach of contract claim. And under the Tucker Act, such
claims must be brought in the Court of Federal Claims, not
federal district court. 28 U. S. C. §1491(a)(1).
   Second, I also agree with the Government that plaintiffs’
challenge to NIH’s guidance on grant terminations is likely
unavailing. For starters, it is not evident that plaintiffs’
challenge to the guidance is separable from their challenge
to the grant terminations. But even if it is, plaintiffs are
unlikely to succeed on the merits of their arbitrary and
capricious challenge to the guidance, for reasons that the
Government persuasively explained in its application to
this Court. See Application 29–34; id., at 31 (“The district
2     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                 Opinion of KAVANAUGH, J.

court’s principal objection was that the NIH never defined
the term ‘DEI.’ . . . But there is no APA rule that agencies
define every term in every internal guidance document,
particularly when that guidance steers highly discretionary
decisions over how to allocate limited agency resources”);
id., at 32 (“Here, the NIH’s guidance described the
Administration’s general priorities on research funding and
instructed implementation on a grant-by-grant basis”);
ibid. (“Agency guidance documents do not need to come
with glossaries just to avoid APA invalidation”); Reply Brief
11 (“Respondents echo . . . the district court’s criticism of
the guidance documents’ failure to explicitly define DEI.
Respondents ignore case law holding that grant criteria
need not define terms with exacting precision”).
  Finally, the harms and equities are weighty on both
sides. But in my view, they tilt toward the Government
because plaintiffs have not represented that they would
return the grant money if the Government were to
ultimately prevail in the merits litigation.
  JUSTICE JACKSON seems to suggest that we can avoid this
significant (albeit interim) forum-channeling decision by
simply denying the application. That is wrong. We have to
decide the application. Denying the application in whole
(as JUSTICE JACKSON and three others would do) would
mean that the suit belongs for now in the Federal District
Court or the First Circuit. Granting the application in
whole (as I and three others would do) would mean that the
suit belongs for now in the Court of Federal Claims.
Granting in part and denying in part (as the Court’s order
does) means that the challenge to the grant terminations
belongs for now in the Court of Federal Claims and the
arbitrary and capricious claim belongs for now in the
Federal District Court or the First Circuit. For this Court,
there is no way to avoid deciding the application and
thereby making that interim forum-channeling decision.
               Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)     3

                Opinion of KAVANAUGH, J.

                         *    *     *
  For those reasons, I would grant the Government’s
application for an interim stay in full.
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

                     Opinion of JACKSON, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 25A103
                          _________________


    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
          AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH
              ASSOCIATION, ET AL.
                 ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                        [August 21, 2025]

  JUSTICE JACKSON, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
  This past spring, as March turned to April, the Court took
a mere nine days to address a difficult and nuanced legal
issue: whether a federal district court or the Court of
Federal Claims has statutory jurisdiction over a claim that
the Government violated the Administrative Procedure Act
(APA), 5 U. S. C. §706, by arbitrarily and capriciously
terminating federal grants en masse. See Department of
Ed. v. California, 604 U. S. ___ (2025) (per curiam). It chose
the Court of Federal Claims. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 2). I
viewed the Court’s intervention then—in an emergency
stay posture, while racing against a fast-expiring
temporary restraining order—as “equal parts unprincipled
and unfortunate.” Id., at ___ (JACKSON, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 16).
  As it turns out, the Court’s decision was an even bigger
mistake than I realized.         The Court’s reasoning in
California was not only “at the least under-developed, and
very possibly wrong,” id., at ___ (KAGAN, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 1), but also evidently resolved more than the
jurisdictional dispute over the particular education-related
grants at issue in that case. Today’s decision reveals
California’s considerable wingspan: That case’s ipse dixit
now apparently governs all APA challenges to grant-
2     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                  Opinion of JACKSON, J.

funding determinations that the Government asks us to
address in the context of an emergency stay application. A
half paragraph of reasoning (issued without full briefing or
any oral argument) thus suffices here to partially sustain
the Government’s abrupt cancellation of hundreds of
millions of dollars allocated to support life-saving
biomedical research.
   For a cautionary tale about lawmaking on the emergency
docket, look no further than this newest iteration. By
today’s order, an evenly divided Court neuters judicial
review of grant terminations by sending plaintiffs on a
likely futile, multivenue quest for complete relief. Neither
party to the case suggested this convoluted procedural
outcome, and no prior court has held that the law requires
it. But, in the view of the deciding vote, California compels
this conclusion.       “So only another under-reasoned
emergency order undergirds today’s.” Trump v. Boyle, 606
U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (KAGAN, J., dissenting from grant of
application for stay) (slip op., at 2).
   The Court also lobs this grenade without evaluating
Congress’s intent or the profound legal and practical
consequences of this ruling.            Stated simply: With
potentially life-saving scientific advancements on the line,
the Court turns a nearly century-old statute aimed at
remedying unreasoned agency decisionmaking into a
gauntlet rather than a refuge. But we have no business
erecting a novel jurisdictional barrier to judicial review—
especially when it appears nowhere in the relevant statutes
and makes little sense.          Because the Government’s
application should have been denied in full, I respectfully
dissent in part.
                           I
  Some background helps to clarify the character of the
governmental action the Court now bends over backward to
accommodate.
                 Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                    Opinion of JACKSON, J.

                               A
  The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is the largest
public funder of medical research in the world. Congress’s
express instructions have enabled that status: By statute,
the NIH must “make grants-in-aid to universities,
hospitals, laboratories, and other public or private
institutions, and to individuals” to contribute to the effort
to diagnose, treat, and prevent “physical and mental
diseases and impairments of man.” 42 U. S. C. §§241(a),
(a)(3).
  Various statutory provisions shape the NIH’s discretion
in allocating these funds, including in ways that recognize
the importance of science for the study, healing, and service
of a diverse Nation. For instance, Congress requires the
National Cancer Institute, an institute within the NIH, to
fund “community-based programs designed to assist
women who are members of medically underserved
populations, low-income populations, or minority groups.”
§285a–6(c)(1)(C). And it instructs another NIH-based
institute, the National Institute on Minority Health and
Health Disparities, to “make awards of grants . . . for the
purpose of . . . supporting programs of excellence in
biomedical and behavioral research training for individuals
who are members of minority health disparity populations.”
§285t–1(a); see also, e.g., §289a–2(a)(1) (requiring the NIH
to ensure that women and members of minority groups are
represented in the clinical research it supports).
  Historically, the NIH has awarded multiyear grants
pursuant to established statutory criteria and objectives.
See, e.g., 42 CFR §52a.5 (2024). Also historically, the NIH’s
grant selection process has been rigorously scientific. See
Brief for Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC)
et al. as Amici Curiae 5–8. Grant terminations, meanwhile,
have been rare; according to testimony in this case, the NIH
terminated fewer than six grants midstream in the 13 years
from 2012 to January 20, 2025.
4      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of JACKSON, J.

   The NIH’s implementation of its grantmaking obligations
changed dramatically in February 2025, after the President
signed a trio of executive orders instructing the
Government to stop diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)
initiatives, “gender ideology” promotion, and COVID–19
research.1 In response, NIH leadership issued a series of
directives ordering termination, en masse, of existing
grants that the agency perceived as in tension with the new
Administration’s policies.
   A frantic process followed. As detailed by the District
Court, the NIH and its constituent institutes subsequently
engaged in a “wholesale effort to excise grants in 8
categories over a period of less than 90 days.” ___ F. Supp.
3d ___, ___ (Mass. 2025), App. to Application 116a (App.).
When the dust settled, thousands of grants had been
canceled, including those supporting research into suicide
risk and prevention, HIV transmission, Alzheimer’s, and
cardiovascular disease.
                             B
                             1
  The two informally consolidated cases now before the
Court were brought by, first, a group of individual
researchers, doctors, and unions who depend on NIH
funding for their research; and, second, a coalition of 16
States, suing on behalf of their public universities. The
plaintiffs sued in Federal District Court, arguing that the
NIH had implemented the executive orders in a manner
that violated the APA, the separation of powers, the
Spending Clause, and the Constitution’s prohibition
against ultra vires action.
  Handling the case with dispatch, the District Court
initially analyzed what has become the Government’s
primary contention: that the APA claim is really a breach-
——————
 1 See Exec. Order No. 14151, 90 Fed. Reg. 8339 (2025); Exec. Order

No. 14168, 90 Fed. Reg. 8615; Exec. Order No. 14173, 90 Fed. Reg. 8633.
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                     Opinion of JACKSON, J.

of-contract suit, and that the Tucker Act, 28 U. S. C. §1491,
therefore channels the case to the Court of Federal Claims
rather than the District Court. As it does here, the
Government took inspiration from this Court’s recent order
in California. But the District Court concluded that
California was “somewhat different,” Massachusetts v.
Kennedy, ___ F. Supp. 3d ___, ___ (Mass. 2025), App. 228a,
such that Bowen v. Massachusetts, 487 U. S. 879 (1988),
controlled and permitted the case to remain in district
court.
   The basic distinction, the court explained, is that while
breach-of-contract actions for money damages go to the
Claims Court, statutory actions to ensure compliance with
federal law belong in district court. California could be
conceived of as the former, insofar as it focused only on
“sums awarded . . . in previously awarded discretionary
grants.” App. 228a (internal quotation marks omitted). By
contrast, this action sought to prevent the NIH “from
violating the statutory grant-making architecture created
by Congress, replacing Congress’ mandate with new
policies that directly contradict that mandate, and
exercising authority arbitrarily and capriciously”—
wheelhouse APA contentions. Id., at 235a.
   After dismissing some of the plaintiffs’ claims, the
District Court proceeded directly to a bench trial on the
merits. At the trial’s conclusion, the District Court reserved
judgment on most claims but ruled on the one it was
“confident in” after “a careful review”: that the challenged
directives and resulting terminations were arbitrary and
capricious, and so had to be set aside under the APA. Id.,
at 159a–160a; see 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A).
   The District Court laid out its factual findings and legal
conclusions in a 103-page opinion. With respect to the
arbitrariness allegation, the District Court explained,
among other things, that “DEI”—the central concept the
executive orders aimed to extirpate—was nowhere defined,
6      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of JACKSON, J.

leaving individual agency employees “to arrive at whatever
conclusion [they] wishe[d].” ___ F. Supp. 3d, at ___, ___,
App. 126a–127a, 131a–132a. That definitional void left
them applying “circular and nonsensical boilerplate
language,” id., at 129a, to cancel grants without
explanation or reason and in a manner that had “absolutely
nothing to do with the promotion of science or research,” id.,
at 52a. In place of science, meanwhile, came something
more pernicious: The court found, as a factual matter, “an
unmistakable pattern of discrimination against women’s
health issues” and “pervasive racial discrimination”—
indeed, “palpable” racial discrimination of a sort the judge
had “never seen” in 40 years on the bench. Id., at 45a–46a,
n. 4, 166a. The result was a policy of mass grant
terminations that was “breathtakingly arbitrary and
capricious.” Id., at 124a. So the District Court declared
unlawful and vacated the challenged directives and the
“resulting . . . terminations” of the plaintiffs’ grants. Id., at
148a–152a (capitalization omitted).
                               2
   After the District Court entered partial final judgment,
the Government asked that court, and then the First
Circuit, to stay that judgment pending appeal. Both courts
declined.     In response to the Government’s primary
argument—the Tucker Act one—the First Circuit issued an
opinion that sought to “harmonize” this Court’s decisions in
Bowen, 487 U. S. 879; Great-West Life & Annuity Ins. Co. v.
Knudson, 534 U. S. 204 (2002); and California, 604 U. S.
___. See 145 F. 4th 39, 50 (2025). It concluded that those
decisions permitted the District Court to enter, as it had,
“ ‘prospective relief ’ that will govern ‘the rather complex
ongoing relationshi[p]’ between the [NIH] and grant
recipients,” especially because the District Court’s
determination did not depend on the terms of any contract.
Id., at 50–51 (quoting Bowen, 487 U. S., at 905).
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)              7

                     Opinion of JACKSON, J.

   The First Circuit’s stay opinion also evaluated the
relative harms and compared the balance of the equities to
those in California. It concluded that these plaintiffs stood
to lose more and the Government less: Unlike in California,
these researchers lack the financial wherewithal to keep
their programs running on their own—meaning a stay
would euthanize animal subjects, terminate life-saving
trials, and close community health clinics. And unlike in
California, there is no fast-expiring temporary restraining
order incentivizing a rushed drawdown of granted funds.
Accordingly, the First Circuit declined to stay the District
Court’s partial judgment pending appeal.
                               C
   The Government now asks us for a stay. To obtain one,
the Government must make “a strong showing” that it will
likely succeed on the merits, that it will be irreparably
harmed absent a stay, and that the balance of the equities
(including the public interest) favors a stay. See Nken v.
Holder, 556 U. S. 418, 426 (2009) (internal quotation marks
omitted). Because two lower courts have already denied
stays, the Government bears “an especially heavy burden”
to secure one from us. Edwards v. Hope Medical Group for
Women, 512 U. S. 1301, 1302 (1994) (Scalia, J., in
chambers) (internal quotation marks omitted).
   Yet, today, without any such showing, this Court gives
the Government much of what it asks for. It splits review
of the grant terminations from review of the grant
termination policy—thereby preserving the mirage of
judicial review while eliminating its purpose: to remedy
harms. The Court now holds that a plaintiff who maintains
that the Government’s midstream termination of promised
grant funding was “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law,” 5
U. S. C. §706(2)(A), can file a claim in federal district court,
seeking to set aside the unlawful agency guidance that
8      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of JACKSON, J.

caused it to lose its grant. But if it wants the improperly
terminated grant funding restored, a lawsuit filed in
district court will not suffice; apparently, for that remedy,
the plaintiff has to bring another legal action in a different
court. See ante, at 3–5 (BARRETT, J., concurring in partial
grant of application for stay).
  It gets worse. From the logic (such as it is) of the Court’s
order, it appears that a plaintiff ’s pursuit of grant
reinstatement in the Court of Federal Claims—where
today’s ruling shunts them—will be in vain, because the
Tucker Act “impliedly forbids” that plainly appropriate
relief. 5 U. S. C. §702. And worse still, the viability of the
initial district court action is also in doubt, since a plaintiff
seeking invalidation of an unlawful grant termination
policy standing alone (a posture that today’s decision
requires) might still flunk the APA’s final-agency-action
test. See ante, at 5–6 (opinion of BARRETT, J.).
  It would have been much simpler for the Court to just
announce that, regardless of the plain text of the APA or
what Congress intended to authorize, we no longer accept
that the Government’s grant-termination decisions are
subject to arbitrary-and-capricious review or that vacatur
of an arbitrary grant-termination decision is an available
remedy. At least that would have been straightforward.
  Instead, as I explain below, the Court obliquely rewrites
both the plaintiffs’ complaint and the APA. First, it forces
the plaintiffs to allege that the agency has unlawfully
breached a grant contract when their actual claim is the
unlawful decisionmaking cause of action that the APA
plainly authorizes. Then, the Court adopts a bifurcated,
ultimately ineffectual approach to seeking complete relief
for the disfigured claim it has created. Today’s order thus
effectively extinguishes district courts’ power to “set aside”
arbitrary grant terminations, as that remedial power
necessarily involves the concomitant restoration of the
unlawfully terminated grant funding.
                 Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                    Opinion of JACKSON, J.

  Part II, below, explains why the Court’s order is wrong
with respect to both the merits of the underlying
jurisdictional question and the claim-splitting procedure it
adopts.     Part III demonstrates that the remaining,
nonmerits factors weigh heavily against the stay, which
means today’s error will have grave real-world
consequences. Either way, the Government’s emergency
application should have been denied in full.
                               II
                               A
  A majority of the Court rightly rejects the Government’s
frontline merits position: that this whole case belonged in
the Court of Federal Claims. Had it prevailed, that view
would have flatly contravened seven decades of
administrative law and practice. See, e.g., Sharp v.
Weinberger, 798 F. 2d 1521, 1523 (CADC 1986) (Scalia, J.).
It would have also carried astonishing implications—
including, by the Government’s own admission, that no
court would have the power to vacate or enjoin a blatantly
discriminatory grant-related policy, such as a blanket ban
on federal grants to Black or Catholic researchers. See
Reply 7–8.
  Five Members of the Court reject that radical view today.
So, district courts may still exercise jurisdiction over—and
vacate—grant-related policies that contravene federal law,
including the one here, which this District Court considered
“breathtakingly arbitrary and capricious” and therefore set
aside under the APA. ___ F. Supp. 3d, at ___, App. 124a.
  From there, this case should have been easy. The sole
legal conclusion the District Court reached concerned the
arbitrary and capricious (i.e., unlawful) nature of the
challenged directives. And those directives were the
undisputed basis for the plaintiffs’ grant terminations.
Thus, in the District Court’s view, as in mine, the remedy
for the unlawful grant-termination directives is obvious:
10     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of JACKSON, J.

invalidation of the policy and reinstatement of the
plaintiffs’ grants. Accord, ante, at 1 (ROBERTS, C. J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part). It is, after all,
an “uncontroversial” feature of APA review “that, when a
court with jurisdiction finds that the plaintiffs before it
were harmed by an agency decision issued under an illegal
rule, the court should vacate that wrongful decision as a
remedy.” D. A. M. v. Barr, 486 F. Supp. 3d 404, 416 (DC
2020).
   The Court’s order deviates dramatically from this
ordinary, commonsense approach to APA review. Its
chosen approach—splitting the directives from the grants—
implies one of two things. Either the Court doubts that the
grant terminations at issue here in fact resulted from the
unlawful directives; or it doubts that plaintiffs who prevail
in APA cases should see any benefit from their victory.
   The Court’s order does not own either implication—and
for good reason. The District Court carefully reinstated (or,
more precisely, declared unlawful the termination of ) only
those grants whose termination “result[ed]” from the
directives. App. 148a–152a. The causal chain from policy
to termination is a factual question, and we are given no
basis upon which to second-guess the District Court’s view.
Cf. Trump v. American Federation of Government
Employees, 606 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2025) (JACKSON, J.,
dissenting from grant of application for stay) (slip op., at 8–
12). Indeed, not even the Government contests—instead, it
emphasizes—the fit between directive and implementation.
See, e.g., Application 25–26; Reply 4–5 (“the guidance led to
the termination of [the plaintiffs’] grants”); see also ante, at
1 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.). I also do not take the Court
to be revisiting, much less unsettling, the (recently
reaffirmed) basic principle that a prevailing plaintiff should
generally get to benefit from its victory. See, e.g., Franklin
v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 U. S. 60, 76 (1992)
(rejecting interpretation of a statute that would “leave
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)             11

                     Opinion of JACKSON, J.

petitioner remediless”); cf. Trump v. CASA, Inc., 606 U. S.
___, ___ (2025) (slip op., at 17) (courts should generally
grant “complete relief to the plaintiffs before the court”
(emphasis deleted)).
                                B
  So there must be something different about this context—
some     reason     that,     normal    remedial      principles
notwithstanding, a district court cannot order the
restoration of a plaintiff ’s federal grants after it finds that
those grants were terminated pursuant to an unlawful
policy. For this, the Court turns to the Tucker Act. But the
Tucker Act likely has nothing to say about this case. It
certainly neither constructs the jurisdictional maze today’s
order sketches nor requires the result today’s order
presumes (i.e., no relief for unlawfully short-changed
grantee-plaintiffs).
  The Government’s jurisdictional argument lies,
ironically, at the intersection of two sovereign-immunity
waivers. The APA waives the Government’s sovereign
immunity from claims complaining of unlawful agency
action and “seeking relief other than money damages.” 5
U. S. C. §702. The Tucker Act waives the Government’s
sovereign immunity from (as relevant here) money-
damages claims “founded . . . upon any express or implied
contract with the United States,” and it sends such claims
(again, as relevant here) to the Court of Federal Claims. 28
U. S. C. §1491(a)(1); see United States v. Mitchell, 463 U. S.
206, 212 (1983). The Government does not dispute that the
APA’s waiver, by its terms, applies to the claims brought in
this lawsuit—it does not, for instance, argue that these
plaintiffs seek “money damages.” See Application 21–22.
So the question is not whether sovereign immunity has been
waived but which waiver applies: the APA’s or the Tucker
Act’s.
12    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                  Opinion of JACKSON, J.

  On this point, the APA itself offers guidance by means of
two intersection-navigating provisions. First and foremost,
the APA makes its cause of action available only if there is
“no other adequate remedy in a court.” 5 U. S. C. §704.
And, notably, the Government does not argue that district
court review is unavailable for failure to meet this
requirement. Nor could it reasonably do so, because the
Court of Federal Claims is authorized to award only money
damages for contract breaches, not reinstatement of grant
funding improperly terminated in violation of federal law.
By its plain terms, then, §704 permits an APA lawsuit in
district court seeking the otherwise unavailable remedy of
grant reinstatement. See Bowen, 487 U. S., at 904–905.
  Recognizing that Bowen forecloses a §704-based
argument, the Government points instead to §702. This
provision anticipates potential waiver overlap and
withdraws the APA’s immunity waiver when plaintiffs
attempt to use the APA to obtain relief that “any other
statute that grants consent to suit expressly or impliedly
forbids.”   Section 702 thus “prevents plaintiffs from
exploiting the APA’s waiver to evade limitations on suit
contained in other statutes.” Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish
Band of Pottawatomi Indians v. Patchak, 567 U. S. 209, 215
(2012).
  But, of course, any statute that might preclude APA relief
via §704 (by providing an adequate alternative remedy) or
§702 (by forbidding the remedy sought) must be “addressed
to the type of grievance” the APA claim asserts. See id., at
220–221 (quoting H. R. Rep. No. 94–1656, p. 28 (1976));
Maryland Dept. of Human Resources v. Department of
Health and Human Servs., 763 F. 2d 1441, 1449 (CADC
1985). The relevant part of the Tucker Act is “addressed to”
contract claims, which these are not.
  These plaintiffs’ legal claims have nothing at all to do
with individual grant contracts, nor do the plaintiffs seek
“past due sums” as relief. See Maine Community Health
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                     13

                          Opinion of JACKSON, J.

Options v. United States, 590 U. S. 296, 326–327 (2020).
The plaintiffs do not argue that the Government shorted
any of its contractual obligations. Rather, they claim the
Government flubbed its most basic statutory one: to engage
in reasoned decisionmaking.2 And they seek not damages
for the Government’s contract breach but a mandate that it
comply with federal law over the course of the parties’
“ongoing relationship.” Bowen, 487 U. S., at 905.3 The
plaintiffs, in other words, “asser[t] a grievance altogether
different from the kind the [Tucker Act] concerns.” Match-
E-Be-Nash-She-Wish Band, 567 U. S., at 216. And the
grievance they assert is “a garden-variety APA claim,” id.,
at 220—which means it likely belongs in federal district
court.
  The analysis should end there. The Government’s sole
retort is that, in this context, a winning APA claim—setting
aside the guidance and, consequently, vacating the
——————
   2 Thus, it mischaracterizes the plaintiffs’ claims to construe them as

being based on a contract breach. It is simply not true that the plaintiffs’
“injury and alleged right to payment stem from the government’s refusal
to pay promised grants according to the terms and conditions that
accompany them.” Ante, at 3–4 (GORSUCH, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part). Indeed, from these plaintiffs’ perspective, the terms
and conditions of the promised grants, and whether or not the
Government complied with them, are entirely beside the point—
regardless, the Government must act (make decisions, including the
decision to cancel grants) in accordance with federal law. So, as the
plaintiffs’ complaints and arguments consistently maintain, their injury
and right to payment actually stem from the Government’s allegedly
arbitrary and capricious termination of their grant funding in violation
of the APA.
   3 See also, e.g., Transohio Sav. Bank v. Director, Office of Thrift

Supervision, 967 F. 2d 598, 610 (CADC 1992), abrogated on other
grounds as recognized in Perry Capital LLC v. Mnuchin, 864 F. 3d 591,
620 (CADC 2017) (“The lesson . . . is straightforward: under §702 and the
Tucker Act, litigants may bring common-law contract claims only as
actions for money damages in the Claims Court, but they may bring
statutory and constitutional claims for specific relief in the federal
district court”).
14    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                  Opinion of JACKSON, J.

resulting grant terminations—would obligate it to pay
money to the plaintiffs.        (This central tenet of the
Government’s argument, by the way, is apparently not
shared by JUSTICE BARRETT, whose deciding vote causes a
winning APA claim somehow to confer no financial benefit
to the injured plaintiffs.) But we have long recognized that
such a mere “by-product” of APA review does not send a
case to the Court of Federal Claims. See Bowen, 487 U. S.,
at 910; accord, California, 604 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2)
(“[A] district court’s jurisdiction ‘is not barred by the
possibility’ that an order setting aside an agency’s action
may result in the disbursement of funds” (quoting Bowen,
487 U. S., at 910)); Department of State v. AIDS Vaccine
Advocacy Coalition, 604 U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (ALITO, J.,
dissenting from denial of application to vacate order) (slip
op., at 6) (“Bowen simply recognized a basic reality of APA
review: after a court sets aside an agency action, a natural
consequence may be the release of funds to the plaintiff
down the road”).
   Given all this, I would have concluded, at least in this
preliminary posture, that the Tucker Act bears not at all on
this case.
                             C
   But whatever the Tucker Act might have to say about
APA claims brought in cases like this one, it surely does not
compel the bizarre claim-splitting regime the Court
imposes today. After today’s order, how are plaintiffs like
these—federal grantees who believe their grants were
terminated pursuant to an unlawful policy—to get complete
relief ? The Court does not say. The answer, it seems, is
they cannot.
   Such a grantee can operate like the plaintiffs here did, by
filing an APA claim in district court challenging the policy
under which they lost their grants. Such a grantee can, like
the plaintiffs here, win that claim and have the policy set
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                         Opinion of JACKSON, J.

aside as unlawful. And then—what? The district court that
just set aside the unlawful policy apparently cannot
“adjudicate claims ‘based on’ ” the grant terminations that
resulted from the policy (whatever that means after today)
or “order relief designed to enforce any ‘ “obligation to pay
money” ’ pursuant to those grants.” Ante, at 1 (order)
(quoting California, 604 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2)). But,
of course, it is the prospect of getting its wrongfully
terminated grant money that brings the grantee to court in
the first place. That prospect is also, one presumes, the only
(or at least the primary) reason the grantee has Article III
standing to sue at all.
  Because past courts recognized the absurdity of such a
result, we have already rejected the argument that the
Tucker Act requires the District Court “to split” cases like
this “into two parts.” Bowen, 487 U. S., at 911. Rather,
having struck down unlawful agency action, the District
Court “also had the authority to grant the complete relief ”
that followed. Ibid.4 Under the rule the Court announces
——————
   4 Not only does the Tucker Act not require splitting the case into two;

28 U. S. C. §1500 likely forbids it. That provision precludes Claims
Court jurisdiction over any claim that shares “substantially the same
operative facts” with a claim pending in another court, even if the claims
seek different relief. United States v. Tohono O’odham Nation, 563 U. S.
307, 317 (2011). So, besides the obvious inefficiency of recruiting two
courts to do what one could, §1500 likely precludes the sort of parallel-
track litigation the Court seems to envision. See ante, at 2 (KAVANAUGH,
J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (explaining that today’s
order “means that the challenge to the grant terminations belongs for
now in the Court of Federal Claims and the arbitrary and capricious
claim belongs for now in the Federal District Court or the First Circuit”);
see, e.g., Solenex, LLC v. United States, 163 Fed. Cl. 128, 132–133 (2022).
Perhaps the district court and Claims Court actions can proceed seriatim
rather than simultaneously, assuming the statute of limitations does not
run in the meantime. But seriatim actions would raise tricky questions
of issue and claim preclusion. Cf. Petro-Hunt, LLC v. United States, 862
F. 3d 1370, 1385–1386 (CA Fed. 2017). The Court grapples with none of
these complexities before sending plaintiffs through the labyrinth it has
created.
16     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                  PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                   Opinion of JACKSON, J.

today, however, no court can reinstate the plaintiffs’
grants—apparently, the Tucker Act “impliedly forbids” it.
5 U. S. C. §702. This novel reading of the Tucker Act
undermines not only Bowen’s holding but also the basic
remedial principles underlying it. Forget complete relief—
the reasoning of today’s order might leave plaintiffs unable
to obtain any effective relief at all.
   To be specific: “Unlike the district courts, . . . the [Claims
Court] has no general power to provide equitable relief
against the Government or its officers.” United States v.
Tohono O’odham Nation, 563 U. S. 307, 313 (2011); see also
United States v. King, 395 U. S. 1, 3 (1969) (Claims Court
lacked jurisdiction over claim that was “not limited to
actual, presently due money damages” but rather sought a
declaratory judgment that governmental action “was
legally wrong”). This means, it seems, that the Claims
Court cannot reinstate unlawfully terminated grant
funding—a distinct remedy from the money damages that
JUSTICE BARRETT suggests are still available in the Claims
Court. See ante, at 4, n. 1. And while the Claims Court
does have authority to award money damages for a breach
of contract, it is not clear that it could do so here, where the
right the plaintiffs seek to vindicate “is not a contract right”
but a statutory one. See Crowley Govt. Servs., Inc. v.
General Servs. Admin., 38 F. 4th 1099, 1110 (CADC 2022).5
   This result, it should be evident, is also impossible to
reconcile with the Court’s recent pronouncements. Not so
long ago, the Court insisted that “the party-specific
principles that permeate our understanding of equity”
instruct courts to award “complete relief ” to plaintiffs and
no relief to nonplaintiffs. CASA, Inc., 606 U. S., at ___, ___
——————
   5 The Claims Court can adjudicate statutory claims but only those

derived from “money-mandating provisions.” Maine Community Health
Options v. United States, 590 U. S. 296, 324 (2020); United States v.
Navajo Nation, 556 U. S. 287, 290 (2009). No one contends that the APA
is such a provision.
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                    17

                         Opinion of JACKSON, J.

(slip op., at 8, 15). Today’s exercise of equity flips that
proposition on its head. Non-plaintiffs might see some
benefit from district courts’ vacatur of unlawful directives
because agencies will not be able to rely on them to cancel
grants going forward. But the plaintiffs who filed the
lawsuit will see none.
   In a broader sense, however, today’s ruling is of a piece
with this Court’s recent tendencies. “[R]ight when the
Judiciary should be hunkering down to do all it can to
preserve the law’s constraints,” the Court opts instead to
make vindicating the rule of law and preventing manifestly
injurious Government action as difficult as possible. Id., at
___ (JACKSON, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 21). This is
Calvinball jurisprudence with a twist. Calvinball has only
one rule: There are no fixed rules.6 We seem to have two:
that one, and this Administration always wins.7
                             III
  This Court has an obligation to balance the equities
before issuing the “extraordinary” relief of a stay pending
appeal, Graves v. Barnes, 405 U. S. 1201, 1203 (1972)
(Powell, J., in chambers), by “ ‘explor[ing] the relative
harms to applicant and respondent, as well as the interests
of the public at large,’ ” Barnes v. E-Systems, Inc. Group
Hospital Medical & Surgical Ins. Plan, 501 U. S. 1301, 1305
(1991) (Scalia, J., in chambers) (quoting Rostker v.
Goldberg, 448 U. S. 1306, 1308 (1980) (Brennan, J., in

——————
   6 See  Oxford English Dictionary (2025), https://www.oed.com/
dictionary/calvinball_n.
   7 JUSTICE BARRETT’s separate opinion proves the point. It injects final

agency action into the case as an additional potential barrier to relief,
suggesting that the only challenge the order leaves open—the one to
agency guidance—is in fact foreclosed by a doctrine the Government does
not press. See ante, at 5–6; see also ante, at 4, n. 2 (opinion of GORSUCH,
J.) (indicating that plaintiffs lack standing to pursue vacatur of the
internal agency guidance).
18      NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                   PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                    Opinion of JACKSON, J.

chambers)); see also Nken, 556 U. S., at 435. If the Court
had bothered to do so here, the result would be plain.
   At the threshold, before this Court even entertains the
factors required for granting a stay application, it ought to
ensure that the applicant faces the sort of true emergency
that warrants our consideration of its request and the
attendant interference with the standard review processes
pending in the lower courts—what I have elsewhere called
a “line-jumping justification.” Labrador v. Poe, 601 U. S.
___, ___ (2024) (JACKSON, J., dissenting from grant of stay)
(slip op., at 1).8 Here, the Government does not come close
to offering any reason for us to intervene. Its asserted
harm—its only asserted harm—is that it might have to
keep paying out grants it has already committed to paying
for the few months it will take to appeal the District Court’s
decision.     Those payments are incremental, and the
Government does not so much as represent their cadence;
it gives zero information that would enable us to ascertain
how much money is on the line in the coming months.

——————
  8 We do not have to decide this case—not in this posture, or, really,

ever. But see ante, at 2 (opinion of KAVANAUGH, J.). We exercise an
enormous amount of discretion even in the ordinary course. See
Supreme Court Rule 10 (“Review on a writ of certiorari is not a matter of
right, but of judicial discretion”). That discretion only expands when we
are presented with a request for extraordinary relief: Intervention in this
posture “is not a matter of right, but of discretion sparingly exercised.”
Supreme Court Rule 20. Thus, JUSTICE KAVANAUGH’s suggestion that
the Court has no choice but to decide the parties’ relative interim status
when an emergency application asks us to do so, see ante, at 2, comes
from nowhere; no rule of Supreme Court procedure supports it. What is
more, casting our role as compulsory when it comes to applications of this
sort contradicts decades of practice. “The opinions are legion in which
individual Justices, reviewing such requests in chambers, declined to
intervene—reiterating that ‘such power should be used sparingly and
only in the most critical and exigent circumstances.’ ” Libby v. Fecteau,
605 U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (JACKSON, J., dissenting from grant of
application for injunction) (slip op., at 4) (quoting Williams v. Rhodes, 89
S. Ct. 1, 2, 21 L. Ed. 2d 69 (1968) (Stewart, J., in chambers)).
                     Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)                   19

                         Opinion of JACKSON, J.

  The Government fares no better under the traditional
stay factors, even if this Court’s attention were warranted.
As it did in California, the Court concludes that the
Government faces irreparable harm simply because the
plaintiffs do not pinky-promise to reimburse the
Government if the Government ultimately prevails.
Whether or not that correctly states the law of irreparable
harm, but see Nken, 556 U. S., at 433–434 (stay applicant
bears burden), the gauge by which the Court is measuring
harm seems significantly off.9 The harm that the plaintiffs
and the public will suffer from a stay plainly dwarfs the
purportedly irreparable injury to the Government if a stay
is denied.       For the Government, the incremental
expenditure of money is at stake. For the plaintiffs and the
public, scientific progress itself hangs in the balance—along
with the lives that progress saves.
  Make no mistake: Per the evidence in front of the District
Court, the forward march of scientific discovery will not
only be halted—it will be reversed. Because “studies and
researchers cannot be held in stasis,” “there is no way to
recover the lost time, research continuity, or training value
once disrupted.” 145 F. 4th, at 55 (internal quotation marks
omitted; emphasis deleted). Thus, yearslong studies will
lose validity. Animal subjects will be euthanized. Life-
saving medication trials will be abandoned. Countless
researchers will lose their jobs. And community health

——————
  9 The Government promised grant money to the plaintiffs, and now it

has changed its mind. These things happen. Whether the law permits
the Government to terminate these grants in this manner is the nub of
the instant dispute. Even if the Government is ultimately deemed
entitled to do what it has done, why is it harmed (in any meaningful
sense) if it cannot recover the previously promised grant payments that
happen to issue while a court is deciding the lawfulness of its change of
heart? Far from being injurious, one might think that those interim
payments are a fair price to pay for the disruption the Government’s
choice to abruptly renege on its promises has caused.
20    NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH v. AMERICAN
                 PUBLIC HEALTH ASSN.
                  Opinion of JACKSON, J.

clinics (providing, inter alia, preventative treatment for
infectious diseases) will close. Ibid.
   These harms extend well beyond the plaintiffs in this
case. Amici collectively representing the vast majority of
NIH grantees detail the devastating and irrevocable
damage to the “symbiotic relationship” between the
Government and the Nation’s research community that an
abrupt cessation of funding would cause, not to mention the
harm to the global primacy of American science. Brief for
AAMC et al. as Amici Curiae 3, 16–24. And, as Congress
recognized when it made the NIH the world’s largest public
scientific funder, scientific advancement lifts all boats. The
harm is not just to researchers who will lose their
livelihoods; vulnerable members of our society will also lose
the benefits of their research.
   Notably, too, these considerations represent just the
consequences of a stay in this case. But the Court evidently
wishes to impose its cumbersome, multistep judicial-review
process on any grantee that attempts to preserve its
research advancements by filing a lawsuit (if indeed the
Court envisions any path to full recovery for such grantees
at all). So, take the aforementioned practical harms to the
researchers, subjects, and institutions that have filed the
instant lawsuits and multiply them—and again, and again,
and again.
   A stay seems like a modest step. But it is an equitable
one, and equity ultimately aims to ensure fairness by
reducing harm. With this deployment of our equitable
powers, the Court permits precisely the sort of harm
equitable discretion exists to prevent.
                       *    *     *
  At a time when the Executive Branch is racing to
terminate federal grants on a mass scale—and, according
to too many courts to count, often unlawfully—this Court
has now constructed a deeply inefficient and likely
                  Cite as: 606 U. S. ____ (2025)            21

                     Opinion of JACKSON, J.

impotent scheme of judicial review for grant-related APA
claims     (at    least    until   plenary    review     forces
reconsideration). It has done so without bothering to assess
whether Congress intended such a scheme, and in a manner
that requires second-guessing the District Court’s
unchallenged factual findings, muddying basic legal
principles, and unraveling valuable scientific research.
  The approach the Court adopts today (which, again, no
party advocated for) neither coheres legally nor operates
practically. So, unfortunately, this newest entry in the
Court’s quest to make way for the Executive Branch has
real consequences, for the law and for the public.
Fortunately, at least for the law, this order is not the last
word, as it is not “conclusive as to the merits.” Boyle, 606
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 1). For the public’s sake, one can
only hope that affected grant recipients can find a way to
maintain their research studies—and their legal claims—
long enough to give the Court the chance to change its mind.