(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

 FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

    No. 23–861.      Argued December 9, 2024—Decided April 30, 2025
Tens of thousands of federal civilian employees serve the Nation as mil-
  itary reservists. When called to active duty, these reservists often re-
  ceive less pay than they earn in their civilian jobs. To address this
  gap, Congress adopted a “differential pay” statute requiring the gov-
  ernment to make up the difference between a federal civilian em-
  ployee’s military and civilian pay in various circumstances, including
  when the reservist is called to active duty “during a national emer-
  gency.” At issue here is whether this language guarantees differential
  pay when a reservist serves on active duty while a national emergency
  is ongoing, or whether it requires proving a “substantive connection”
  between the service and a particular national emergency.
     Petitioner Nick Feliciano, an air traffic controller with the Federal
  Aviation Administration, also served as a Coast Guard reserve petty
  officer. In July 2012, the Coast Guard ordered him to active duty un-
  der 10 U. S. C. §12301(d), which authorizes activation of reservists
  with their consent. He remained on active duty until February 2017,
  serving aboard a Coast Guard ship escorting vessels to and from har-
  bor. His orders noted that he was called to active duty “in support of”
  several “contingency operation[s],” including Operations Iraqi Free-
  dom and Enduring Freedom. Throughout this period, Feliciano did not
  receive differential pay for his service pursuant to orders under
  §12301(d). After the Merit Systems Protection Board rejected his dif-
  ferential-pay claim, he appealed to the Federal Circuit.
     Feliciano argued that two statutes entitled him to differential pay:
  5 U. S. C. §5538(a) and 10 U. S. C. §101(a)(13)(B). Section 5538(a) re-
  quires differential pay for federal civilian employee reservists ordered
  to active duty “under . . . a provision of law referred to in”
  §101(a)(13)(B). Section 101(a)(13)(B) defines “contingency operation”
2        FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                                  Syllabus

    to include operations that result in the call to active duty of service-
    members under several enumerated statutes “or any other provision
    of law during a war or during a national emergency declared by the
    President or Congress.” While acknowledging he was not called up
    under any of the specifically listed statutes, Feliciano contended that
    the final phrase entitled him to differential pay because he was or-
    dered to active duty under “any other provision of law” (§12301(d))
    “during a national emergency.”
       The Federal Circuit disagreed. Following its earlier decision in Ad-
    ams v. Department of Homeland Security, 3 F. 4th 1375, the court held
    that when a reservist seeks differential pay for service “during a na-
    tional emergency,” he must show not only that he served while a na-
    tional emergency was ongoing, but also that a substantive connection
    linked his service to a particular national emergency.
Held: A federal civilian employee called to active duty pursuant to “any
 other provision of law . . . during a national emergency” as described
 in §101(a)(13)(B) is entitled to differential pay if the reservist’s service
 temporally coincides with a declared national emergency without any
 showing that the service bears a substantive connection to a particular
 emergency. Pp. 4–16.
    (a) Several considerations support this interpretation. First, the
 word “during” normally “denotes a temporal link” and means “contem-
 poraneous with.” United States v. Ressam, 553 U. S. 272, 274–275. It
 does not generally imply any substantive connection. Absent evidence
 that Congress intended a specialized meaning, those governed by law
 are entitled to rely on its ordinary meaning. Pp. 4–6.
    (b) Contextual clues strengthen this conclusion. When Congress in-
 tends to require both temporal and substantive connections, it has
 done so expressly, using phrases like “during and in relation to” or
 “during and because of” in various statutes. So the absence of any
 words hinting at a substantive connection in the statute at issue here
 supplies a telling clue that it operates differently and imposes a tem-
 poral condition alone. See Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas, 596 U. S.
 685, 704. Additionally, one of the specific provisions that can trigger
 differential pay, 10 U. S. C. §12302, authorizes activation of reservists
 “[i]n time of national emergency”—language the government contends
 speaks only temporally. If that phrase requires no substantive con-
 nection, it is implausible that “during a national emergency” in
 §101(a)(13)(B) would do so. Moreover, requiring a substantive connec-
 tion would create interpretive difficulties, as the statute provides no
 principled way to determine what kind of substantive connection
 would suffice. The government’s interpretation would also create ten-
 sion with 18 U. S. C. §209, potentially criminalizing differential pay
 given by private employers to reservists, even though nothing in the
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                     3

                                Syllabus

  phrase “during a national emergency” tells a private employer that a
  substantive connection is required, let alone what sort of connection
  must exist. Finally, when the Congressional Budget Office scored sim-
  ilar legislation to help Congress understand the likely impact of pro-
  posed legislation, it calculated costs based on “the total number of re-
  servists on active duty,” not just those engaged in emergency-related
  duties. CBO’s approach provides further evidence of how an ordinary
  reader might have understood the statutory language at issue here.
  Pp. 6–9.
     (c) The government’s counterarguments are unpersuasive. First,
  although the word “during” can sometimes imply more than a temporal
  connection depending on context, in this statutory context a purely
  temporal relationship is meaningful. A reservist’s active-duty service
  during a national emergency bolsters the government’s capacity to ad-
  dress that emergency whether or not his service directly relates to it.
  Second, the government’s surplusage argument—that a temporal-only
  reading would render the phrase meaningless given the perpetual ex-
  istence of national emergencies—fails for several reasons: The inter-
  pretation leaves no part of the statute without work to do; the argu-
  ment depends on contingent factual assumptions about the
  permanence of emergency declarations; similar statutes use temporal
  language without requiring substantive connections; and the statute
  provides no principled way to determine what kind of substantive con-
  nection would suffice. Finally, the potential policy consequences the
  government highlights cannot overcome the statute’s most natural
  reading. Pp. 9–16.
Reversed and remanded.

   GORSUCH, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C.
J., and SOTOMAYOR, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, KAGAN, and JACKSON, JJ.,
joined.
                        Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 23–861
                                   _________________


  NICK FELICIANO, PETITIONER v. DEPARTMENT
             OF TRANSPORTATION
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
                                 [April 30, 2025]

  JUSTICE GORSUCH delivered the opinion of the Court.
  Tens of thousands of federal civilian employees serve the
Nation as military reservists. When the military calls those
reservists to active duty, it often pays them less than they
earn in their civilian jobs. Seeking to address that gap,
Congress some years ago adopted a “differential pay” stat-
ute. That law requires the government to make up the dif-
ference between a federal civilian employee’s military and
civilian pay in various circumstances, including when he is
called to active duty “during a national emergency.” The
question we face concerns the meaning of that quoted lan-
guage. Does it guarantee a reservist differential pay when
he serves on active duty while a national emergency is on-
going, or does it require a reservist to prove that his service
bears a “substantive connection” to a particular national
emergency?
                              I
  Nick Feliciano began working for the Federal Aviation
Administration as an air traffic controller in 2005. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 9a. At the same time, Mr. Feliciano served as
a reserve petty officer in the United States Coast Guard.
2     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      Opinion of the Court

Ibid.; Brief for Respondent 6. In July 2012, the Coast
Guard ordered him to active-duty service and, for the most
part, he remained on active duty until February 2017. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 14a.
    During much of that period, the statutory authority for
Mr. Feliciano’s active-duty service came from 10 U. S. C.
§12301(d). As a general matter, that provision authorizes
the activation of reservists with their consent. Mr. Felici-
ano’s §12301(d) orders noted that he was called to active
duty to serve “in support of ” several “contingency opera-
tion[s],” including Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation
Enduring Freedom. App. to Pet. for Cert. 33a, 75a–76a;
Brief for Respondent 7. Throughout his active-duty service,
Mr. Feliciano served onboard a Coast Guard ship escorting
other vessels to and from harbor. Brief for Petitioner 8;
Brief for Respondent 6.
    While Mr. Feliciano served on active duty pursuant to or-
ders under §12301(d), the government did not afford him
differential pay. App. to Pet. for Cert. 31a, 34a–37a. Even-
tually, that led Mr. Feliciano to seek relief from the Merit
Systems Protection Board. Id., at 8a, 34a–37a. There, he
claimed the FAA had created a hostile work environment
and unlawfully denied him differential pay during the time
he spent serving on active duty under §12301(d). After the
Board rejected his claims, see id., at 29a–30a, 37a, Mr. Fe-
liciano appealed to the Federal Circuit.
    On appeal, Mr. Feliciano argued that two statutes enti-
tled him to differential pay: 5 U. S. C. §5538(a) and 10
U. S. C. §101(a)(13)(B). See Brief for Petitioner in No.
2022–1219 (CA Fed., Apr. 29, 2022), ECF Doc. 21, p. 19. As
relevant here, §5538(a) requires the government to provide
differential pay to a federal civilian employee reservist
when the military orders him to active-duty service “under
. . . a provision of law referred to in section 101(a)(13)(B) of
title 10” of the U. S. Code. Section 101(a)(13)(B), in turn,
                      Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                       3

                           Opinion of the Court

forms part of the definition of the phrase “contingency op-
eration.” A contingency operation, that statute says, in-
cludes a “military operation that . . . results in the call or
order to . . . active duty of members of the uniformed ser-
vices under section 688, 12301(a), 12302, 12304, 12304a,
12305, or 12406 of [title 10], chapter 13 of [title 10], section
3713 of title 14, or any other provision of law during a war
or during a national emergency declared by the President or
Congress.” (Emphasis added.)1
   Though Mr. Feliciano acknowledged that he was not
called up under any of the specific statutes listed in
§101(a)(13)(B), he argued that the statute’s closing words,
italicized above, entitled him to differential pay. After all,
the Coast Guard called him to active duty under another
“provision of law” (§12301(d)), and his orders came “during
a national emergency.” ECF Doc. 21, at 21–23. As a result,
he contended, he served pursuant to a call to active duty
under “a provision of law referred to in 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13)(B),” and was thus entitled to differential pay
under §5538(a). Id., at 19, 23.
   The Federal Circuit disagreed. Citing its earlier decision
in Adams v. Department of Homeland Security, 3 F. 4th
1375 (2021), the court reasoned that, when a reservist seeks
differential pay for service “during a national emergency,”
he must show not only that he served on active duty while
a national emergency was ongoing. He must also show a
substantive connection between his service and a particular
national emergency. App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a. Because Mr.

——————
   1 Section 101(a)(13)(A) forms the other part of the definition of the

phrase “contingency operation.” It provides that “contingency operation”
also includes “a military operation that . . . is designated by the Secretary
of Defense as an operation in which members of the armed forces are or
may become involved in military actions, operations, or hostilities
against an enemy of the United States or against an opposing military
force.” Notably, however, 5 U. S. C. §5538(a) does not reference this pro-
vision for purposes of determining when differential pay is due.
4      FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                           Opinion of the Court

Feliciano had not made that second showing, the court held,
he was not entitled to differential pay. Id., at 3a–4a.
  Mr. Feliciano sought review of the Federal Circuit’s deci-
sion, and we agreed to take his case. 602 U. S. ___ (2024).
                               II
   At its core, the dispute before us turns on the meaning of
the phrase “during a national emergency.” Does that lan-
guage promise differential pay to certain federal civilian
employees called to active-duty service while a national
emergency is ongoing, as Mr. Feliciano argues? Or does it
require a reservist to prove some additional, substantive
connection between his service and a particular national
emergency, as the Federal Circuit held and the government
contends? Several considerations persuade us that Mr. Fe-
liciano’s interpretation is the sounder one.
                              A
  Start with the word “during.” Normally, we have said,
that word “denotes a temporal link” and means “contempo-
raneous with.” United States v. Ressam, 553 U. S. 272,
274–275 (2008). Any number of dictionaries from around
the time of §101(a)(13)(B)’s adoption in 1991 offer up simi-
lar formulations. See, e.g., Black’s Law Dictionary 504 (6th
ed. 1990) (defining “during” as “[t]hroughout the course of;
throughout the continuance of; in the time of; after the com-
mencement and before the expiration of ”).2

——————
   2 Accord, Random House Dictionary of the English Language 608 (2d

ed. 1987) (during: “throughout the duration, continuance, or existence
of ” or “at some time or point in the course of ”); Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 703 (1993) (during: “throughout the continu-
ance or course of ” or “at some point in the course of ”); American Herit-
age Dictionary 572 (3d ed. 1992) (during: “[t]hroughout the course or
duration of ” or “[a]t some time in”). Dictionaries from the time of §5538’s
enactment in 2009 say the same. See, e.g., American Heritage Dictionary
556 (4th ed. 2006) (during: “[t]hroughout the course or duration of ” or
“[a]t some time in”).
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                     Opinion of the Court

  Conversely, the word “during” does not generally imply a
substantive connection. The government itself has previ-
ously acknowledged as much. As its briefing in Ressam ex-
plained, “[t]he plain everyday meaning of ‘during’ is ‘at the
same time’ or ‘at a point in the course of.’ It does not nor-
mally mean ‘at the same time and in connection with.’ ”
Brief for United States in United States v. Ressam, O. T.
2007, No. 455, pp. 13–14 (emphasis added). Reading “dur-
ing” to require a substantive connection, the government
warned, risks “read[ing] in a relational element” that the
word does not necessarily convey. Tr. of Oral Arg. in United
States v. Ressam, O. T. 2007, No. 455, p. 31. Adopting just
that view, this Court in Ressam held that a sentencing en-
hancement addressing those who carry an explosive “dur-
ing” the commission of a felony applies to individuals who
carry explosives “contemporaneous with” their felonies
even in the absence of a substantive “relationship between
the explosive carried and the underlying felony.” 553 U. S.,
at 275.
  Sometimes, to be sure, statutory terms can carry mean-
ings that depart from their ordinary ones. Congress may,
for example, define a word or phrase in a specialized way or
employ a term of art with long-encrusted connotations in a
given field. See, e.g., Department of Agriculture Rural De-
velopment Rural Housing Service v. Kirtz, 601 U. S. 42, 59–
60 (2024); Sekhar v. United States, 570 U. S. 729, 733
(2013). But we have no evidence of anything like that here.
And absent such evidence, those whose lives are governed
by law are entitled to rely on its ordinary meaning, not left
to speculate about hidden messages. See, e.g., Henson v.
Santander Consumer USA Inc., 582 U. S. 79, 86 (2017); Niz-
Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155, 163 (2021).
  Given all that, we think Mr. Feliciano’s reading more con-
sistent with the statutory language before us. Just ask
yourself how an ordinary American might approach the
6     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      Opinion of the Court

law’s terms. Would he have any reason to think that a re-
servist called up to active duty “during” a national emer-
gency is entitled to differential pay if, and only if, he can
prove his service has a “substantive connection” to a partic-
ular emergency? We doubt it.
                               B
   Strengthening our conviction on this score are a number
of contextual clues.
   First, compare the statute before us with other laws.
When insisting on both a temporal and a substantive con-
nection in other settings, Congress has commonly made its
point expressly. Up and down the federal criminal code, for
instance, statutes speak of actions taken “during and in re-
lation to” specified criminal conduct.          18 U. S. C.
§924(c)(1)(A)    (emphasis      added);   see    also,   e.g.,
§§115(b)(1)(B)(iv), 924(c)(5), 929(a)(1). When it comes to
statutes governing the Armed Forces, Congress has used
the phrase “during and because of ” to describe leave both
contemporaneous with and related to a reservist’s active-
duty service. 5 U. S. C. §6323(b)(2)(B). Congress, too, has
exempted from certain statutory requirements the govern-
ment’s acquisition of land when it takes place both “during
a national emergency” and “for national defense purposes.”
7 U. S. C. §4208(b) (emphasis added). As these examples
illustrate, Congress can and does use different words in dif-
ferent provisions to insist on a substantive connection. But
the absence of any words hinting at a substantive connec-
tion in the statute before us supplies a telling clue that it
operates differently and imposes a temporal condition
alone. See Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas, 596 U. S. 685,
704 (2022).
   Next, consider another provision that can trigger differ-
ential pay. Recall that the differential-pay statute—5
U. S. C. §5538—not only works in concert with
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             7

                      Opinion of the Court

§101(a)(13)(B) to ensure differential pay for certain reserv-
ists ordered to active duty “during a national emergency.”
It also guarantees differential pay for other reservists
called up under specific statutes listed in §101(a)(13)(B).
See Part I, supra. One such statute, 10 U. S. C. §12302,
authorizes the activation of various reservists “[i]n time of
national emergency.” The government contends that this
language speaks only temporally. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 61–
62. But if that is true and the phrase “[i]n time of a national
emergency” in §12302 requires no substantive connection,
how might “during a national emergency” in §101(a)(13)(B)
do so? If a plausible explanation exists for interpreting the
one phrase, but not the other, to require a substantive con-
nection, the government does not supply it.
   Notice, as well, the questions that would follow from in-
sisting on a substantive connection here. To prove a sub-
stantive connection, the government suggests, a reservist
must show that he served in support of a contingency oper-
ation while on active duty. Brief for Respondent 23–24; Tr.
of Oral Arg. 75–76; post, at 17 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (ar-
guing the same). But the Federal Circuit applies a more
demanding test. On its view, a reservist must show that he
served directly in a contingency operation to merit differen-
tial pay. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a; Adams, 3 F. 4th, at
1379. How might we choose between these two rules? The
statute does not say. And the fact that Congress supplied
no principled way to determine what kind of substantive
connection is necessary strikes us as yet another sign that
the law does not require any such connection.
   Also relevant, to our minds, is how the parties’ competing
interpretations interact with 18 U. S. C. §209. As a rule,
that law makes it a crime for a private party to supplement
a federal employee’s salary. See §209(a). At the same time,
the statute offers an important exception: It allows a pri-
vate party to offer differential pay to a reservist-employee
“on active duty pursuant to a call or order to active duty
8      FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                          Opinion of the Court

under a provision of law referred to” in 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13). 18 U. S. C. §209(h). On the government’s read-
ing of §101(a)(13)(B), a private employer would apparently
commit a federal crime by providing differential pay to a
reservist on active-duty service while a national emergency
is ongoing—unless, of course, the reservist’s service bears a
substantive connection to a particular national emergency.
But what in the phrase “during a national emergency” tells
a private employer that a substantive connection is re-
quired, let alone what sort of connection it must be?3
   Finally, adding to the case against the government’s in-
terpretation are the views of others who have come this way
before us. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) provides
cost estimates to help Members of Congress understand the
likely impact of their proposed legislation. See, e.g., Con-
gressional Research Service, J. Saturno, Introduction to the
Federal Budget Process 19 (Jan. 10, 2023). And when CBO
scored potential legislation featuring terms that largely
mirror those now at issue here, it based its calculations on
“the total number of reservists on active duty,” not those
who are personally engaged in emergency-related duties.
CBO, Cost Estimate, S. 593: Reservist Pay Security Act of
2004, pp. 2–3 (Aug. 4, 2004) (emphasis added); see also
CBO, Cost Estimate, S. 2400: Ronald W. Reagan National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005, p. 9 (July
21, 2004). Of course, no one votes for CBO reports, and
courts charged with interpreting the law owe those esti-
mates no rote deference. But CBO’s approach does provide

——————
  3 At oral argument, the government suggested that an employer who

mistakenly provides differential pay to a reservist without confirming
that his service has the requisite substantive connection to a particular
emergency might escape liability for lack of a sufficient mens rea to war-
rant a conviction. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 45–46; see also United States v.
Project on Government Oversight, 616 F. 3d 544, 556–557 (CADC 2010).
Maybe so. But that still leaves unanswered the question whether the
statute fairly informs an employer what is (and is not) proscribed.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                      Opinion of the Court

further evidence of how an ordinary reader might have un-
derstood the statutory language at issue here around the
time of the differential-pay statute’s adoption. See A. Scalia
& B. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal
Texts 388 (2012) (Scalia & Garner).
                             III
   The government and our dissenting colleagues see things
differently. They insist that the phrase “during a national
emergency” requires a substantive connection between a re-
servist’s service and a particular national emergency. To
our minds, however, the government and the dissent do not
adequately grapple with the textual and contextual evi-
dence we have set forth. They give short shrift to Ressam
and the ordinary meaning of the word “during.” They brush
aside other statutes showing that Congress knows how to
impose a substantive connection when it wishes. They do
not convincingly explain how §12302 might be read to re-
quire only a temporal connection but “during a national
emergency” must be read to demand more. They discount
CBO’s practice. And they nowhere offer a principled basis
for preferring the substantive connection they propose over
the alternative the Federal Circuit offered.
   To be sure, the three central arguments the government
and the dissent pursue are not entirely without force. But
even on their own terms, each suffers deficiencies and, to
our eyes, none suffices to overcome the competing evidence
of statutory meaning we have outlined.
                              A
  The government and the dissent begin by observing that,
in at least some contexts, the word “during” can imply more
than a temporal connection. Brief for Respondent 14–17;
see post, at 4–6 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). To illustrate the
point, the government asks us to imagine a statute that “re-
ferred to any attorney who argues ‘during’ a court hearing.”
10    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                     Opinion of the Court

Brief for Respondent 14. A reader would, the government
posits, understand that language “to include only attorneys
who argue in the course of the hearing—not those who ar-
gue elsewhere while the hearing happens to be occurring.”
Ibid.
   It’s a fair observation. Context plays a vital role when
interpreting statutes. And, in the context of the govern-
ment’s hypothetical law, we agree that an ordinary reader
would understand it to require both a temporal and sub-
stantive connection between an attorney’s argument and
the court hearing. Really, without a substantive connec-
tion, the government’s imagined statute would be meaning-
less, capturing any attorney who happens to argue any-
where in any forum at the same time as the ongoing
hearing. The same goes for the dissent’s example of a stat-
ute defining a “ ‘captured record’ ” to mean “ ‘material cap-
tured during combat operations.’ ” Post, at 5 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.) (quoting 10 U. S. C. §427(g)(1)). There, too, an
ordinary reader would understand Congress as referring
only to records captured in the course of combat operations,
not to all records captured while combat was ongoing some-
where, for without that substantive connection the statute
would be senseless.
   But we fail to see how that observation translates here.
In this statutory context, a purely temporal relationship is
meaningful. After all, a reservist’s active-duty service dur-
ing a national emergency bolsters the government’s capac-
ity to address that emergency; his work on everyday mat-
ters may free up others to handle emergent ones. Notably,
the government itself argues that Congress has sometimes
taken just this view, promising differential pay to certain
reservists called to active duty “in time of national emer-
gency,” whether or not their service bears a substantive
connection to a particular emergency. See Part II–B, supra
(discussing 10 U. S. C. §12302). In this context, then, un-
like in some others, reading the word “during” to speak only
                      Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    11

                          Opinion of the Court

temporally is perfectly sensible.4
                               B
   Next, the government and the dissent invoke the surplus-
age canon. If the phrase “during a national emergency” re-
quired only a temporal overlap, the government and the dis-
sent say, it would do practically no work. After all, the
argument goes, there are dozens of declared emergencies
today, some have been on the books for years, and it is “un-
likely that there will ever be a time when no national emer-
gency exists.” Brief for Respondent 18–19; post, at 9–12
(opinion of THOMAS, J.). The only way to give the phrase
“during a national emergency” work to do, we are told, is to
interpret it to require a substantive connection.
   Here, again, the government and the dissent have some-
thing of a point. With the exception of a brief period in the
1970s, one declared national emergency or another has
been ongoing in this country for many decades. Brief for
Respondent 18; post, at 9 (THOMAS, J., dissenting). Even
——————
   4 Pursuing a similar argument from statutory context, the dissent sub-

mits that, because the phrase “contingency operation” implies some “ex-
igenc[y]” as a matter of “ordinary” usage, the word “during” must entail
a substantive connection. See post, at 6–9 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). But
none of that follows. The phrase “contingency operation” is subject to an
express statutory definition, to which we must adhere “even if it varies
from a term’s ordinary meaning.” Digital Realty Trust, Inc. v. Somers,
583 U. S. 149, 160 (2018). That definition includes a military operation
that results in a call to active duty under certain specifically enumerated
statutory authorities or under any other law “during a national emer-
gency.” As even the dissent admits, some of the specifically enumerated
statutory authorities are “not pegged to [a] specific exigenc[y].” Post, at
7 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). By way of example, consider again 10 U. S. C.
§12302, which the government says allows it to call reservists to active
duty “[i]n time of national emergency” regardless whether their service
bears a substantive connection to any particular emergency. And if the
specifically enumerated statutory authorities that help define a “contin-
gency operation” do not always demand a substantive connection be-
tween a reservist’s service and a particular emergency, we see no reason
why the phrase “during a national emergency” must.
12    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      Opinion of the Court

so, this line of argument does not persuade us for a few rea-
sons taken in combination.
   For one thing, the surplusage canon is primarily a tool of
linguistic interpretation, reflecting an assumption applica-
ble to “all sensible writing: Whenever a reading arbitrarily
ignores linguistic components or inadequately accounts for
them, the reading may be presumed improbable.” Scalia &
Garner 174 (internal quotation marks omitted). Nothing in
our interpretation of §101(a)(13)(B) defies that general rule
of construction. When a reservist is called to active duty
under one of the statutes enumerated in §101(a)(13)(B),
§5538(a) guarantees him differential pay. And when a re-
servist is called to active duty under “any other provision of
law,” he is entitled to differential pay only if a national
emergency (or war) is ongoing.              See 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13)(B); 5 U. S. C. §5538(a). Linguistically, our
reading leaves no part of the statute ignored or left without
work to do.
   For another, the government and dissent’s practical (not
linguistic) superfluity argument depends on a contingent
factual assumption. Imagine Congress and the President
decided tomorrow to end all existing emergencies. No one
disputes that our reading of the statute would perform
practically significant work in those circumstances, effec-
tively denying differential pay to reservists called to active
duty under “any other provision of law.” 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13)(B). But, the government and the dissent insist,
we should ignore that possibility because emergencies have
become an immutable feature of modern governance. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 43; post, at 9 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).
   Maybe so, but maybe not. In the 1970s, the elected
branches did something nearly like what the government
today considers unthinkable. In 1976, Congress passed and
President Ford signed the National Emergencies Act, which
effectively ended then-existing emergencies and estab-
lished procedures for declaring (and concluding) new ones.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            13

                      Opinion of the Court

See 90 Stat. 1255 (codified at 50 U. S. C. §1601 et seq.); Con-
gressional Research Service, E. Webster, National Emer-
gency Powers 7–11 (Nov. 19, 2021). In spite of that inter-
vention, of course, the number of declared emergencies has
only grown in the years since. But history may yet repeat
itself, even if the government today considers the prospect
“unlikely.” Brief for Respondent 19. And it is unclear why
we should overlook the most natural linguistic interpreta-
tion of this statute’s terms based on an assumption that
prevailing factual conditions will never change. What is a
present fact of the world is not necessarily a permanent one.
   For another thing still, the government and dissent’s ap-
proach invites its own superfluity problems. A number of
statutes tie a governmental power or duty to the existence
of some ongoing national emergency. For example, Con-
gress has made certain contracting authorities available to
the Executive Branch “during a national emergency.” 50
U. S. C. §1435. And, as we have seen, Congress has prom-
ised differential pay to certain other reservists called to ac-
tive duty “[i]n time of national emergency.” See Part II–B,
supra. The government maintains that these statutes do
not require a substantive connection, only a temporal over-
lap, with a national emergency. See Brief for Respondent
30; Tr. of Oral Arg. 61–62. Yet, under the government and
dissent’s view, Congress was wasting its breath with super-
fluous language in all these laws. A more natural inference,
we believe, is that Congress sometimes considers a purely
temporal link with a national emergency a salient condition
on governmental powers and duties, even if that condition
will often be satisfied.
   Finally, even if we could somehow overcome all of these
problems, we would only find ourselves facing again the
question of what kind of substantive tie a reservist’s service
must have to a national emergency. And, as we have dis-
cussed, the statute supplies no obviously principled way for
us to resolve what that connection might be. See Part II–
14     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                           Opinion of the Court

B, supra.5
                              C
   Failing all else, the government and the dissent worry
that our interpretation would invite anomalous policy con-
sequences. Brief for Respondent 22; post, at 14 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.) (expressing concern about the potential “ripple
effects” of our decision). So, for example, the government
fears that a purely temporal reading of the phrase “during
a national emergency” might require it to provide differen-
tial pay to a reservist called to active duty to face a court
martial. Brief for Respondent 22–23. Likewise, the govern-
ment says, our reading could require differential pay for a
reservist called up to attend “training for new Judge Advo-
cates at the Judge Advocate General’s Legal Center and
School in Charlottesville, Virginia.” Id., at 23.
   But what does any of that prove? When a party claims
that a law yields anomalous policy consequences, its usual
recourse lies in Congress, not in the courts where litigants
are generally entitled to expect that statutes will “be en-
forced as written.” Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U. S.

——————
   5 The dissent also insists that our reading would render superfluous

various postenactment amendments that have expanded the list of pro-
visions enumerated in §101(a)(13)(B). Post, at 11–12 (opinion of THOMAS,
J.). That argument is mistaken for reasons already discussed: Each of
the amendments the dissent cites promises differential pay even in the
absence of any national emergency. The only possible exception concerns
an amendment that, among other things, authorized differential pay ret-
roactively for certain members of the Coast Guard for a single year, a
year in which there was already an ongoing national emergency. Post,
at 11 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (discussing §681(a), 126 Stat. 1795). But
even assuming that one aspect of that single amendment may represent
“some redundancy” on our account of §101(a)(13)(B), the dissent’s inter-
pretation results in redundancies of its own and encounters so many
other difficulties that we think the “better overall reading of the statute”
remains the one we pursue. Rimini Street, Inc. v. Oracle USA, Inc., 586
U. S. 334, 346 (2019).
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                          Opinion of the Court

497, 525 (2018); see also Patel v. Garland, 596 U. S. 328,
346 (2022) (“[P]olicy concerns cannot trump the best inter-
pretation of the statutory text”).
   Nor, even taken on their own terms, are the potential con-
sequences the government highlights all that anomalous.
Members of the Armed Forces facing court martial are en-
titled to their military wages until convicted, 10 U. S. C.
§857(a)(1), and they are presumed innocent until proven
guilty, §851(c)(1). In light of those statutory directions, it
is hardly absurd to think Congress might have also wanted
a reservist to receive differential pay when called to active
duty to answer a court martial that might acquit him.
Much the same goes for reservists called to active duty for
training. Whether that training entails learning the finer
points of the Uniform Code of Military Justice or attending
Airborne School, well-trained reservists are ones the Na-
tion can call on at a moment’s notice, as it often has. See,
e.g., Brief for State of Texas et al. as Amici Curiae 20
(“Within minutes of the September 11 attacks, National
Guard and Reservists responded to the call to duty”).6
                              *
  In the end, we are persuaded that the statutory language
means what its terms most naturally suggest: A federal ci-
vilian employee called to active duty pursuant to “any other

——————
   6 The dissent expresses concern that our interpretation might lead to

other “untold consequences,” like expanding the “availability of civilian
court[s]-martial” or exempting the Department of Defense from having
to notify Congress before entering into certain real-estate transactions.
Post, at 8 (opinion of THOMAS, J.) (citing 10 U. S. C. §§802(a)(10) and
2662(f )(1)(E)). We express no views on the dissent’s claims except to ob-
serve two things. First, as the dissent acknowledges, considerations of
constitutional avoidance might counsel in favor of a narrowing construc-
tion of certain laws governing courts-martial. See post, at 8 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.). Second, the result the dissent posits with respect to real-
estate transactions is neither unthinkable nor something Congress could
not alter to the extent the Constitution allows.
16    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      Opinion of the Court

provision of law . . . during a national emergency” is enti-
tled to differential pay without having to prove that his ser-
vice was substantively connected in some particular way to
some particular emergency. Because the Federal Circuit
held otherwise, its judgment is reversed, and the case is re-
manded for further proceedings consistent with this opin-
ion.
                                             It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 23–861
                          _________________


  NICK FELICIANO, PETITIONER v. DEPARTMENT
             OF TRANSPORTATION
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
                         [April 30, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE ALITO, JUSTICE
KAGAN, and JUSTICE JACKSON join, dissenting.
   Federal civilian employees who also serve as military re-
servists are entitled to “differential pay” when they are
called to active-duty service “during a national emergency.”
See 5 U. S. C. §5538; 10 U. S. C. §101(a)(13)(B). Differen-
tial pay compensates such reservists for the difference be-
tween their military and civilian salaries when active-duty
service would otherwise cause a pay cut. The question be-
fore us is what Congress meant by the phrase “during a na-
tional emergency.” Depending on the context, that phrase
could require only that a national emergency be concur-
rently ongoing, or it could require that a reservist’s service
also be in support of a particular national emergency.
Given the context here, I would conclude that a reservist is
called to serve “during a national emergency” only if his call
comes in the course of an operation responding to a national
emergency. Because the Court requires only that an emer-
gency be concurrently ongoing, I respectfully dissent.
                              I
                             A
  “Tens of thousands” of federal civilian employees also
serve our Nation as military reservists. Ante, at 1. Some-
times these individuals earn lower salaries when called into
2     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

active-duty military service than they do in their regular
jobs. To mitigate this disparity, in 2009 Congress passed
the so-called “differential pay” statute, which ensures that
qualifying reservists will continue to receive the amount of
their civilian Government salaries while on active duty.
See §751, 123 Stat. 693–695, as amended, 5 U. S. C. §5538.
The reservist’s civilian employer is responsible for paying
the difference. §5538(c)(1).
   The statute does not, however, grant a blanket authori-
zation for differential pay. Instead, it makes a federal civil-
ian employee eligible if, as relevant here, he is called to ac-
tive duty “under . . . a provision of law referred to in section
101(a)(13)(B) of title 10.” §5538(a).
   Section 101(a)(13)(B) is one part of the military’s defini-
tion of “ ‘contingency operation.’ ” This statute defines a
“contingency operation” as “a military operation that”:
      “(A) is designated by the Secretary of Defense as an
    operation in which members of the armed forces are or
    may become involved in military actions, operations, or
    hostilities against an enemy of the United States or
    against an opposing military force; or
      “(B) results in the call or order to, or retention on,
    active duty of members of the uniformed services under
    section 688, 12301(a), 12302, 12304, 12304a, 12305, or
    12406 of this title, chapter 13 of this title, section 3713
    of title 14, or any other provision of law during a war
    or during a national emergency declared by the Presi-
    dent or Congress.”
  The list of cross-referenced provisions in §101(a)(13)(B)
has evolved since Congress first enacted this definition in
1991, but Congress has throughout maintained a catchall
for calls to active-duty service under other provisions “dur-
ing a war or during a national emergency.” See §631(a), 105
Stat. 1380.
                   Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)              3

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

                                B
   Petitioner Nick Feliciano is an air traffic controller for the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) who also served as
a reserve officer for the United States Coast Guard. The
Coast Guard called him to active-duty service for much of
the period between July 2012 and February 2017.
   Pursuant to Coast Guard policy, each time it called him
to active duty, the Coast Guard provided Feliciano orders
listing the basis for its call. As relevant here, three of Feli-
ciano’s calls specified that he was being “called up under 10
U. S. C. 12301(d) per Executive Order 13223.” App. to Pet.
for Cert. 75a–76a; App. in No. 22–1219 (CA Fed.), p. 129.
Section 12301(d) is not one of the provisions specifically
enumerated in §101(a)(13)(B). It authorizes the Govern-
ment to “order a member of a reserve component . . . to ac-
tive duty, . . . with the consent of that member.” §12301(d).
   Executive Order 13223, in turn, authorizes the military
to call reservists to active duty in furtherance of the na-
tional emergency declared after the September 11 terrorist
attacks. 66 Fed. Reg. 48201 (2001). Consistent with that
directive, Feliciano’s §12301(d) orders noted that he was be-
ing called “in support of a DOD contingency operation,”
while also listing the relevant operations. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 75a–76a; App. in No. 22–1219, at 129.
   Feliciano did not immediately seek differential pay from
the FAA for his service under these orders. He instead
raised the issue in a 2018 appeal to the Merit Systems Pro-
tection Board (MSPB), as part of a complaint alleging that
the FAA had subjected him to a hostile work environment.
The MSPB denied Feliciano’s request for differential pay.
   The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Cir-
cuit affirmed. 2023 WL 3449138, *1 (May 15, 2023). Feli-
ciano’s case turned on whether he had established that his
service occurred “during a national emergency” within the
meaning of §101(a)(13)(B). The Federal Circuit concluded
that he had not: Under Circuit precedent, Feliciano needed
4     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

to show a “connection between his service and [an] ongoing
national emergency,” id., at *2, such that he was “directly
called to serve in a contingency operation.” Adams v. De-
partment of Homeland Security, 3 F. 4th 1375, 1379 (CA
Fed. 2021). But, notwithstanding the language on the face
of his orders suggesting that his service was connected to
the post-September 11 emergency, Feliciano did not “al-
leg[e] any connection.” 2023 WL 3449138, *2. Instead, he
argued only that the Federal Circuit’s precedent was
wrong, and that any active-duty service should count if
there is a national emergency ongoing. We granted certio-
rari.
                             II
                              A
  This case turns on the meaning of the word “during” in
§101(a)(13)(B). The parties dispute whether the phrase
“during a national emergency” covers any reservist who
performs active-duty service while a national emergency is
ongoing, or whether it requires a connection between the
service and the emergency.
  As with other common words, the meaning of “during”
“depends on the context in and purpose for which it is used.”
Wachovia Bank, N. A. v. Schmidt, 546 U. S. 303, 318 (2006).
Sometimes, “during” can merely “denot[e] a temporal link,”
wherein one event need only occur while another event is
ongoing. United States v. Ressam, 553 U. S. 272, 274
(2008). Other times, however, we use “during” in a nar-
rower, relational sense, to reference only events that are
substantively connected to the ongoing event—that is,
events that occur “in the course of ” or “in the process of ”
the ongoing event. See 3 Oxford English Dictionary 1055
(2d ed. 1989) (emphasis deleted); 4 id., at 1134.
  Case law reflects this variation. In Ressam, for example,
we held that the word “during” was used in the broader
temporal sense in 18 U. S. C. §844(h), which mandates a
                   Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)              5

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

sentencing enhancement for defendants who “ ‘carr[y] an
explosive during the commission of [a] felony.’ ” 553 U. S.,
at 274–275 (quoting §844(h)(2)). That enhancement thus
applies to any defendant whose carrying was “contempora-
neous with” his felony, even if it was not “ ‘in relation to’ the
underlying felony.” Id., at 273–275.
   Conversely, courts in other contexts have held that the
word “during” contains a relational component. For in-
stance, several Circuits have recognized this component in
the Sentencing Guidelines’ definition of “relevant conduct,”
which encompasses all actions by the defendant “that oc-
curred during the commission of the offense of conviction.”
United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual
§1B1.3(a)(1)(A) (Nov. 2024); see, e.g., United States v. Cald-
well, 128 F. 4th 1170, 1180–1183 (CA10 2025) (collecting
cases, and distinguishing Ressam). “[W]hen defining ‘rele-
vant conduct,’ ” they have explained, “the term ‘during’ con-
veys a linkage that is more than a mere temporal overlap;
it also conveys a qualitative overlap such that the conduct
must be related or connected to the crime of conviction.”
United States v. Agyekum, 846 F. 3d 744, 751 (CA4 2017).
   Title 10 also reflects this variation. The Government has
suggested that the similar phrase “[i]n time of national
emergency” in §12302 “speaks only temporally.” Ante, at 7
(citing Tr. of Oral Arg. 61–62). But, other provisions in Title
10 appear to speak in relational terms. For example, as the
majority acknowledges, when Congress defined “ ‘captured
record’ ” to mean certain “material captured during combat
operations,” it presumably was describing only material
captured in the course of those combat operations.
§427(g)(1); see ante, at 10.
   The upshot is that the word “during” does not have a
single definition on which to hang our analysis. Instead,
to determine its meaning here, we must read the
§101(a)(13)(B) catchall “in [its] context and with a view to
6     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

[its] place in the overall statutory scheme.” Davis v. Mich-
igan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803, 809 (1989).
                              B
  The context of §101(a)(13)(B) makes clear that active-
duty service occurs “during a national emergency” within
the meaning of that provision only if the service occurs in
the course of a national emergency. In other words, the re-
servist must be called to serve in an operation responding
to a national emergency. Several important textual clues
counsel in favor of this reading.
                                1
   To start, the scope of the phrase “during a national emer-
gency” is limited by §101(a)(13)(B)’s location within Con-
gress’s definition of “contingency operation.” Because “an
entirely artificial definition is rare,” we typically expect the
meaning of a definition to be “closely related to the ordinary
meaning of the word being defined.” A. Scalia & B. Garner,
Reading Law 228 (2012) (Scalia & Garner). Thus, the “or-
dinary meaning of a defined term” often “plays a . . . limit-
ing role” when choosing between possible interpretations.
Bond v. United States, 572 U. S. 844, 861–862 (2014).
   This canon applies with full force here. As a matter of
ordinary meaning, the term “contingency operation” in Ti-
tle 10 refers to the subset of military operations that relates
to a particular contingency. We should therefore expect
§101(a)(13) to cover only operations that are part of the mil-
itary’s response to “emergency” situations or otherwise ne-
cessitated by “required military operations.” Dept. of De-
fense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms 86 (JCS
Pub. 1–02 1989). Otherwise, there would be no reason for
Congress to use “contingency” as a modifying adjective. See
Weyerhaeuser Co. v. United States Fish and Wildlife Serv.,
586 U. S. 9, 19 (2018) (“Adjectives modify nouns—they pick
out a subset of a category that possesses a certain quality”).
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

   The other categories of “contingency operations” in
§101(a)(13) conform to this understanding.             Section
101(a)(13)(A) covers a paradigmatic kind of contingency op-
eration—those wherein members of the military are likely
to be engaged in opposition to “an enemy of the United
States or against an opposing military force.” Several of the
enumerated provisions in §101(a)(13)(B) similarly cover op-
erations directly responding to specific exigent situations.
See, e.g., §12304a (“assistance in response to a major disas-
ter or emergency”); §12406 (“invasion” or “rebellion”). And,
although the remaining cross-referenced provisions are not
pegged to specific exigencies, they too sound in exigency,
each signaling some reason why a reservist is called to ac-
tive duty. See, e.g., §§12301(a), 12302, 12304.
   Because the common thread among these categories is
that they contemplate only exigent military operations, it
follows that the same should be true of the “during a na-
tional emergency” catchall. We ordinarily read catchall
“clauses . . . as bringing within a statute categories similar
in type to those specifically enumerated.” Federal Maritime
Comm’n v. Seatrain Lines, Inc., 411 U. S. 726, 734 (1973).
The catchall here should not be read in a way that eviscer-
ates §101(a)(13)’s “contingency” focus.
   Tellingly, the military itself has understood the term
“contingency operation” to have a finite scope. Notwith-
standing the existence of ongoing national emergencies, it
has for some troop activations issued “orders stat[ing] that
they are ‘non-contingency’ activation orders.” Adams, 3
F. 4th, at 1377. For example, like Feliciano, the plaintiff in
Adams consented to “ ‘voluntary active duty under
[§]12301(d),’ ” but his orders stated that he was being acti-
vated in a “ ‘non-contingency’ ” capacity. Id., at 1377, 1380.
   It follows that the phrase “during a national emergency”
cannot be understood in purely temporal terms. A purely
temporal construction would eviscerate the specification of
8     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

“contingency operation”: If all military operations that oc-
cur concurrent with a national emergency are contingency
operations, then any military operation requiring a call to
active-duty service could be a contingency operation, re-
gardless of whether there is any contingency involved.
Such a capacious reading would implausibly divorce the
term from its ordinary meaning.
   A review of the other provisions in Title 10 that use the
term “contingency operation” confirms this implausibility.
Because §101(a)(13) is a definition that “appl[ies through-
out] this title,” see §101, as well as in other provisions
where it is incorporated by reference, its definition must fit
the broader statutory scheme, Ali v. Federal Bureau of Pris-
ons, 552 U. S. 214, 222 (2008). There are “dozens of provi-
sions inside and outside Title 10 that are applicable to” con-
tingency operations, and a broad reading of that term would
lead to untold consequences. Brief for Respondent 22. For
example, for contracting provisions such as §2662(f )
(1)(E)—where Congress created a reporting requirement
but provided an exception for contingency operations—a
purely temporal interpretation of “contingency operation”
would invite the exception to swallow the rule. Likewise,
such an interpretation would mean that—under a provision
applying the Uniform Code of Military Justice to civilians
who accompany the U. S. military in the field “[i]n time of
declared war or a contingency operation”—the availability
of civilian court-martial could be quite open-ended.
§802(a)(10); see United States v. Ali, 71 M. J. 256, 261–262
(C. A. Armed Forces 2012). That possibility would run up
against our normal understanding of court-martial as a
“narrow exception” to the civilian justice system, and exac-
erbate any constitutional infirmities of this provision. Reid
v. Covert, 354 U. S. 1, 21, 31–33 (1957) (plurality opinion).
This implausibility is “strong evidence” that the term “con-
tingency operation” must retain limiting force.
Yegiazaryan v. Smagin, 599 U. S. 533, 548 (2023).
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                     9

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

                              2
   The need for “contingency operation” to retain limiting
force is particularly apparent because Congress enacted
§101(a)(13)(B) against a backdrop of indefinite and contin-
ual national emergencies. With the exception of a 1-year
interregnum from 1978 to 1979, the United States has had
at least one national emergency in effect at all times since
1933.1 Thus, when Congress passed §101(a)(13)(B) in 1991,
it would have expected that some national emergency or
other would generally be in effect. It strains credulity to
think that Congress could have meant “contingency opera-
tion” to mean, as a practical matter, essentially every mili-
tary operation.2
   To the extent there could be any doubt, the structure of
§101(a)(13)(B) confirms that Congress did not intend for
the “during a national emergency” catchall to be all
encompassing. After all, Congress created that provision as


——————
   1 Congress took note of this problem in the 1970s. S. Rep. No. 93–549,

p. iii (1973). It passed the National Emergencies Act in 1976, which or-
dered that the then-existing emergencies be terminated as of 1978.
§101(a), 90 Stat. 1255 (codified at 50 U. S. C. §1601(a)). But, the Presi-
dent soon proclaimed a new emergency to order sanctions against Iran.
Exec. Order No. 12170, 3 CFR 457 (1979 Comp.). That emergency re-
mains in effect to this day, alongside several dozen other emergencies
since designated. 89 Fed. Reg. 87761 (2024).
   2 Reading the term “contingency operation” to cover all military opera-

tions that occur while a national emergency is also ongoing would appear
particularly incongruent given the nonmilitary nature of many emergen-
cies. In the years leading up to the 1991 enactment of 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13), almost all the emergency proclamations in effect concerned
economic sanctions. See Brennan Center for Justice, Declared National
Emergencies Under the National Emergencies Act (last updated
Apr. 7, 2025), https://brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/
declared-national-emergencies-under-national-emergencies-act.        It is
not apparent why the existence of unrelated sanctions, administered by
nonmilitary officials, would transform routine military operations into
contingency operations as a matter of ordinary understanding.
10    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

a catchall to a long list of enumerated provisions. As origi-
nally enacted, §101(a)(13)(B) specified that a “military op-
eration” would qualify as a “ ‘contingency operation’ ” if it
“results in the call or order to, or retention on, active duty”
of troops pursuant to one of seven enumerated provisions,
one enumerated chapter of provisions, or “any other provi-
sion of law during a war or during a national emergency.”
105 Stat. 1290. Congress has maintained this structure
since then. The only changes it has made have been to enu-
merate additional statutes. See §101(a)(13)(B).
   Congress’s focus on a reservist’s “call or order” to active
duty and whether that “call or order” arises under specific
provisions of law suggests that Congress cared about the
contents of and the basis for a reservist’s activation orders.
If Congress had meant to effectively deem all operations re-
quiring calls to active-duty service as occurring “during a
national emergency,” then its list of enumerated provisions
would have been unnecessary. Because some emergency is
invariably ongoing, Congress could have omitted all those
enumerations without any meaningful difference.
   The superfluity involved in a purely temporal reading is
a strong sign that a military operation occurs “during a na-
tional emergency” only if it occurs in the course of the Gov-
ernment’s response to a national emergency. Because we
interpret statutes, where possible, to avoid superfluity, we
strive to avoid interpretations that “would in practical ef-
fect render [statutory language] entirely superfluous in all
but the most unusual circumstances.” TRW Inc. v. An-
drews, 534 U. S. 19, 29 (2001). We likewise strive to avoid
“unbounded interpretation[s]” of a catchall that would “ren-
der superfluous” Congress’s provision of “a reticulated list”
elsewhere in the statute. Fischer v. United States, 603 U. S.
480, 493 (2024). Reading “during a national emergency” in
§101(a)(13)(B) to reach only operations undertaken in the
course of the national emergency would avoid these disfa-
vored interpretive outcomes.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             11

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               3
   The postenactment history of both §101(a)(13)(B) and the
differential-pay statute that incorporates that provision
further counsel in favor of reading “during a national emer-
gency” narrowly. It is well established that “subsequent
acts can shape or focus” our selection between possible stat-
utory meanings. FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco
Corp., 529 U. S. 120, 143 (2000). And, in particular, we
must read “a change in [statutory] language . . . , if possible,
to have some effect.” American Nat. Red Cross v. S. G., 505
U. S. 247, 263 (1992). But here, Congress’s postenactment
amendments would be superfluous if all military operations
were already contingency operations through the “during a
national emergency” catchall.
   Most notably, Congress in 2013 amended §101(a)(13)(B)
to specify that military operations requiring troop activa-
tions under what is now 14 U. S. C. §3713—a provision al-
lowing for the emergency activation of Coast Guard reserv-
ists in certain circumstances—would henceforth qualify as
contingency operations. §681(a), 126 Stat. 1795. Congress
also specified that this amendment would be “retroactive”
for one year for purposes of differential pay. §681(d)(2)(A),
id., at 1796. But, if the phrase “during a national emer-
gency” makes all military operations contingency opera-
tions while a national emergency is in effect, then this
amendment and its retroactivity provision would have been
wholly superfluous. With emergencies always in effect, in-
cluding for the entirety of the 1-year retroactivity period,
reservists activated pursuant to the Coast Guard provision
would already have been participants in contingency oper-
ations and so entitled to differential pay.
   Other congressional amendments reflect the same prob-
lem. In 2011, Congress amended §101(a)(13)(B) to deem as
contingency operations military operations requiring acti-
vations through §12304a, which allows certain reservists to
12    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

be called to active duty “[w]hen a Governor requests Fed-
eral assistance in responding to a major disaster or emer-
gency.” §515(b), 125 Stat. 1395. And, in 2018, Congress
amended the differential-pay statute to entitle reservists
activated under 10 U. S. C. §12304b to differential pay.
§605, 132 Stat. 1795. That provision allows activations for
“preplanned mission[s] in support of a combatant com-
mand.” §12304b(a). But, given the backdrop of constant
national emergencies, these changes could have little, if
any, practical effect if §101(a)(13)(B) already made all mili-
tary operations contingency operations so long as an emer-
gency is ongoing.
  Because we disfavor statutory interpretations that would
render statutory language all but superfluous “in practical
effect,” it makes little sense to conclude that Congress en-
acted these amendments in case of a hypothetical day with-
out emergencies. TRW, 534 U. S., at 29. This statutory his-
tory therefore provides another reason to adopt a cabined
reading of the “during a national emergency” language.
                         *     *     *
  Taken together, these contextual clues establish that the
“during a national emergency” catchall in §101(a)(13)(B)
reaches only military operations conducted in response to a
national emergency. The differential-pay statute, in cover-
ing any reservist who is called to active duty “pursuant to a
call or order” under “a provision of law referred to in section
101(a)(13)(B),” incorporates §101(a)(13)(B)’s limits.         5
U. S. C. §5538(a). Thus, the statutory context of 10 U. S. C.
§101(a)(13)(B) also establishes that a reservist qualifies for
differential pay under the “catchall” only if he is called to
serve in an operation responding to a national emergency.
Reservists cannot benefit if they are called to serve merely
while other, unrelated emergency responses are ongoing.
                   Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             13

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               III
   The majority does not persuasively grapple with the fore-
going evidence of §101(a)(13)(B)’s meaning. At most, its
reasoning suggests that Congress could have spoken more
clearly. But, that conclusion cannot justify the Court’s de-
cision today.
   As an initial matter, the majority wrongly puts a thumb
on the scale in favor of reading the word “during” in a purely
temporal sense. “Normally,” it says, “that word ‘denotes a
temporal link’ and means ‘contemporaneous with.’ ” Ante,
at 4 (quoting Ressam, 553 U. S., at 274–275). But, as the
majority later acknowledges, the meaning of “during” is
context dependent. Ante, at 9–10; supra, at 4–6. Often, “or-
dinary reader[s]” will read “during” to “require both a tem-
poral and substantive connection.” Ante, at 10. Our deci-
sion in Ressam is not to the contrary: It stated only that the
purely temporal sense was “the most natural reading of the
word as used in the statute” at issue. 553 U. S., at 274–275
(emphasis added).
   Even if the majority were right about “during” as a gen-
eral matter, we still must read statutes in context. See
Home Depot U. S. A., Inc. v. Jackson, 587 U. S. 435, 441
(2019) (narrowly reading a term that, “standing alone, is
broad”). Here, the majority too quickly brushes aside the
key contextual clues in the scheme before us.
   To start, the majority cannot disregard the ordinary
meaning of “contingency operation” on the ground that we
are interpreting an “express statutory definition” of that
term. Ante, at 11, n. 4. When the meaning of a statutory
definition is unclear, “the ordinary meaning of the term . . .
is one of ‘the most important’ factors we can consider.” Del-
ligatti v. United States, 604 U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (slip op., at
14) (quoting Scalia & Garner 228); see supra, at 6. And,
even on the majority’s view, the meaning of §101(a)(13)(B)
is at least debatable: The majority acknowledges the “force”
of countervailing arguments, and it all but admits that its
14    FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

reading generates superfluity, at least as to Congress’s ret-
roactive provision of differential pay under the Coast Guard
amendment. Ante, at 9, 14, n. 5.
   The majority cannot dodge the larger superfluity problem
raised by its overbroad reading either. The majority specu-
lates that there could be a day where no national emergen-
cies are in effect. Ante, at 12–13. But, given the five-plus
decades of national emergencies against which Congress
legislated, that possibility is far too remote to reflect Con-
gress’s likely intention in enacting §101(a)(13)(B). And,
Congress’s postenactment amendments—including the ret-
roactive amendment—only further confirm that it intended
all of §101(a)(13)(B) to have present effect.
   The majority downplays the ripple effects its opinion will
have for the term “contingency operation” as used in other
provisions. Notwithstanding its decision to define “contin-
gency operation” to mean essentially “any military opera-
tion,” the majority offers “no views” on the full consequences
of its interpretation. Ante, at 15, n. 6. But, Congress made
§101(a)(13) the definition for “contingency operation”
throughout Chapter 10 and beyond, and so we “must, to the
extent possible, ensure that the statutory scheme is coher-
ent and consistent.” Ali, 552 U. S., at 222. We cannot leave
that obligation for another day.
   The majority’s competing textual arguments are also un-
availing. The majority invokes the presumption of con-
sistent usage and the canon of meaningful variation to ar-
gue that a comparison with other statutes shows that
“during” in §101(a)(13)(B) is merely temporal. Under these
principles, “[i]n a given statute, the same term usually has
the same meaning and different terms usually have differ-
ent meanings.” Pulsifer v. United States, 601 U. S. 124, 149
(2024). Thus, the majority argues, it is noteworthy that
Congress used only the word “during,” given that other
Code provisions use “during” or equivalent language in a
purely temporal sense. Ante, at 13. If Congress had wanted
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

to reach only active-duty service undertaken in the course
of a national emergency, the majority posits, it would have
borrowed different, clearer language, such as “during and
in relation to.” Ante, at 6. These arguments are true as far
as they go, but they go only so far.
   Because “drafters more than rarely use the same word to
denote different concepts, and often . . . use different words
to denote the same concept,” inferences like the majority’s
are “particularly defeasible by context.” Scalia & Garner
170–171. And, the presumption of consistent usage and
canon of meaningful variation carry especially little weight
when applied to words that are “ubiquitous” and “context-
dependent,” whose use drafters are not “likely to keep track
of and standardize.” Pulsifer, 601 U. S., at 149. That is the
case with a preposition such as “during,” which even the
majority acknowledges to be context dependent, including
in its meaning elsewhere in Title 10. See ante, at 10; supra,
at 5. Thus, the majority’s arguments on this front cannot
be controlling.3
   Likewise, the interaction of the differential-pay statute
with 18 U. S. C. §209 does not move the needle. That stat-
ute criminally bars private parties from supplementing a
federal employee’s salary, but it creates an exception for
parties who give differential pay to reservists serving on
“active duty under a provision of law referred to in section
101(a)(13).” §§209(a), (h). The majority warns that a nar-
row reading of 10 U. S. C. §101(a)(13) could create liability
——————
   3 The majority emphasizes the Government’s concession that §12302,

one of the provisions enumerated in §101(a)(13)(B), “speaks only tempo-
rally” when “authoriz[ing] the activation of various reservists ‘[i]n time
of national emergency.’ ” Ante, at 7; see supra, at 5. Whatever the merits
of that concession, it does not help the majority. Even when read purely
temporally, §12302—which allows the Government to maintain “[i]n
time of national emergency” a limited “Ready Reserve” of troops who can
be activated as needed—has a clear exigency focus. It does not support
the majority’s near-boundless interpretation of the §101(a)(13)(B)
catchall.
16     FELICIANO v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

for private employers who mistakenly believe an employee
to be serving in the course of a national emergency. Ante,
at 7–8. But, even setting aside that such employers would
likely have a mens rea defense, see ante, at 8, n. 3, this ar-
gument for lenity can be relevant only if, “at the end of the
process of construing what Congress has expressed[,] . . .
the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed
no satisfactory construction,” Lockhart v. United States,
577 U. S. 347, 361 (2016) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). Here, those ordinary canons supply an answer.
   No more availing is the majority’s invocation of the Con-
gressional Budget Office (CBO) as evidence of what an “or-
dinary reader” might think. Ante, at 8–9. The majority
highlights that CBO at one point applied the majority’s
reading when estimating the cost of “potential legislation
featuring [similar] terms.” Ante, at 8. But, as the majority
acknowledges, “no one votes for CBO reports,” and courts
owe CBO “no rote deference.” Ibid. It is not apparent, then,
why CBO’s reports are relevant—particularly given that
the reports contain no interpretive analysis.4 That one gen-
eralist agency, for unknown reasons, once shared the ma-
jority’s view is hardly compelling evidence of
§101(a)(13)(B)’s meaning, especially given the weight of the
interpretive clues and the practice of the military itself. See
supra, at 7.
   Finally, the majority cannot fall back on workability con-
cerns. The majority asks how a substantive standard can
be discerned from the “during a national emergency” lan-
guage, pointing to the somewhat different formulations
that the Government and I have used compared to the Fed-
eral Circuit’s. Ante, at 7, 9. But, “[i]t is not our place to
question whether Congress adopted the . . . most workable
——————
   4 For the reports, see CBO, Cost Estimate, S. 593: Reservist Pay Secu-

rity Act of 2004, pp. 2–3 (Aug. 4, 2004); CBO, Cost Estimate, S. 2400:
Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2005, p. 9 (July 21, 2004).
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           17

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

policy, only to discern and apply the policy it did adopt.”
Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas, 596 U. S. 685, 706 (2022).
   In any event, the majority’s concerns are unjustified.
However formulated, the inquiry should ordinarily be
straightforward. A reservist is eligible for differential pay
through the “during a national emergency” catchall if he is
called to active-duty service in an operation responding to
such an emergency. The nature of an activation can ordi-
narily be determined from the face of the reservist’s activa-
tion orders, which, under Department of Defense and Coast
Guard policies, must state whether he is being activated in
support of a contingency operation. Brief for Respondent
23–24; see Adams, 3 F. 4th, at 1379. If there is any ambi-
guity, the reservist or his civilian employer can obtain clar-
ification. Office of Personnel Management, OPM Policy
Guidance Regarding Reservist Differential Under 5 U. S. C.
5538, p. 23 (rev. June 23, 2015), https://www.opm.gov/
policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/pay-administration/reservist-
differential/policyguidance.pdf. The majority has no basis
to deviate from the commands of statutory text.
                          *    *    *
   My interpretive conclusion does not mean that Feliciano
should be denied differential pay. As even the Government
admits, Feliciano’s “orders indicate that [he] would have
been entitled to differential pay” under a proper reading of
§101(a)(13)(B) because they indicate that he was being
called to active duty to support the Coast Guard’s response
to a national emergency. Brief for Respondent 36; see su-
pra, at 3. The Government argues, however, that petitioner
has forfeited any entitlement. Because we are not a court
of first view, I would vacate and remand so that the Federal
Circuit may assess these issues in the first instance. The
majority instead grants Feliciano relief based on a misread-
ing of the statute. I respectfully dissent.