(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

           OKLAHOMA ET AL. v. ENVIRONMENTAL
               PROTECTION AGENCY ET AL.

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                 THE TENTH CIRCUIT

    No. 23–1067. Argued March 25, 2025—Decided June 18, 2025*
The Clean Air Act (CAA) channels challenges to Environmental Protec-
  tion Agency (EPA) actions to the U. S. Court of Appeals for the D. C.
  Circuit if the actions are “nationally applicable,” and to a regional Cir-
  cuit if they are “locally or regionally applicable.” 42 U. S. C.
  §7607(b)(1). The CAA contains an exception for certain “locally or re-
  gionally applicable” actions “based on a determination of nationwide
  scope or effect,” which also must be brought in the D. C. Circuit. Ibid.
     In 2015, EPA revised the national ambient air quality standards
  (NAAQS) for ozone to be more stringent. Each State submitted a state
  implementation plan (SIP) detailing how it would comply with the
  CAA’s “Good Neighbor” provision, which requires SIPs to “contain ad-
  equate provisions” “prohibiting” in-state emissions activity that would
  interfere with other States’ NAAQS compliance. §7410(a)(2)(D)(i)(I).
  EPA ultimately disapproved 21 States’ SIPs for failure to comply with
  the Good Neighbor provision. These States had asserted they did not
  need to propose new emissions-reduction measures, but EPA disagreed
  after considering the “contents of each individual State’s submission”
  “on its own merits” and making individual determinations for each
  SIP. 88 Fed. Reg. 9354.
     EPA aggregated its disapprovals into one omnibus Federal Register
  rule describing EPA’s “4-step framework” for evaluating SIP submis-
  sions. EPA asserted in the rule that its disapprovals would be review-
  able only in the D. C. Circuit as either nationally applicable actions or,
  alternatively, as locally or regionally applicable actions falling within
——————
  * Together with No. 23–1068, PacifiCorp et al. v. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency et al., also on certiorari to the same court.
2                          OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                                  Syllabus

    the “nationwide scope or effect” exception based on EPA’s use of “the
    same, nationally consistent 4-step . . . framework” and its evaluation
    for “national consistency.” Id., at 9380–9381.
       States and industry petitioners challenged EPA’s SIP disapprovals
    in regional Circuits. Of five Circuits to resolve EPA’s motions to dis-
    miss or transfer, four found regional Circuit review proper. Only the
    Tenth Circuit disagreed, granting EPA’s motion to transfer suits by
    Oklahoma and Utah. The Tenth Circuit concluded that EPA’s omni-
    bus rule constituted a single, nationally applicable action because it
    covered “21 states across the country” and reflected EPA’s application
    of “a uniform statutory interpretation and common analytical meth-
    ods.” 93 F. 4th 1262, 1266.
Held: EPA’s disapprovals of the Oklahoma and Utah SIPs are locally or
 regionally applicable actions reviewable in a regional Circuit. Pp. 5–
 13.
    (a) Applying the framework from EPA v. Calumet Shreveport Refin-
 ing, L.L.C., 605 U. S. ___, venue determination under §7607(b)(1) re-
 quires a two-step inquiry. First, courts identify the relevant EPA “ac-
 tion” and ask whether it is “nationally applicable” or only “locally or
 regionally applicable.” If nationally applicable, challenges belong in
 the D. C. Circuit. If locally or regionally applicable, courts proceed to
 the second step to determine whether the “nationwide scope or effect”
 exception applies to override the default rule of regional Circuit re-
 view.
    An “action” under §7607(b)(1) is a “particular exercis[e] of EPA au-
 thority undertaken pursuant to [a] particular CAA provisio[n].” Id., at
 ___. Courts determine the relevant “action” by reference to the CAA
 provision under which EPA acted, not how EPA presented its decision.
 Each EPA SIP approval constitutes its own “action.” Section
 7607(b)(1) enumerates an individual SIP approval as an example of a
 locally or regionally applicable action, referring expressly to EPA’s “ac-
 tion in approving . . . any implementation plan under section 7410.” It
 follows that each EPA SIP disapproval is also its own action, since EPA
 undertakes SIP disapprovals pursuant to the same CAA authority un-
 derlying SIP approvals. Section 7410 directs each State to adopt and
 submit a plan for NAAQS implementation and directs EPA to either
 approve or disapprove it. Thus, EPA’s approvals and disapprovals are
 opposite sides of the same coin.
    The two SIP disapprovals here are undisputedly locally or regionally
 applicable actions. A SIP is a state-specific plan, so an EPA disap-
 proval on its face applies only to the State that proposed the SIP. An
 EPA decision on an individual SIP “is the prototypical ‘locally or re-
 gionally applicable’ action.” American Road & Transp. Builders Assn.
 v. EPA, 705 F. 3d 453, 455. Pp. 5–8.
                    Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                       3

                               Syllabus

   (b) EPA’s and the Tenth Circuit’s contrary arguments fail. Section
7607(b)(1) “makes the CAA’s framing of the relevant ‘action’ control-
ling, regardless of how EPA chooses to package its decisions in the Fed-
eral Register.” Calumet, 605 U. S., at ___. Although EPA was free to
aggregate its SIP disapprovals into one rule, that aggregation has no
significance for venue purposes. The Tenth Circuit’s view that EPA’s
“action” is whatever it has “chosen to issue,” 93 F. 4th, at 1267, fails to
grapple with what §7607(b)(1) means by “action,” which is defined by
reference to the underlying CAA provision, not EPA’s stylization, Cal-
umet, 605 U. S., at ___.
   The Tenth Circuit also erred in deeming EPA’s actions nationally
applicable based on EPA’s use of “uniform statutory interpretation and
common analytical methods.” 93 F. 4th, at 1266. The “applicability”
of an action turns on its formal geographical scope. An action “applies”
nationally only if, on its face, it has binding effect throughout the coun-
try. Calumet, 605 U. S., at ___. EPA’s interpretive and analytical
methodology goes to its underlying reasoning, which matters only at
the second §7607(b)(1) step. Pp. 8–9.
   (c) Because EPA’s SIP disapprovals are locally or regionally applica-
ble, the Court must determine whether the “nationwide scope or effect”
exception applies. This exception requires that (1) the action “is based
on a determination of nationwide scope or effect,” and (2) EPA “finds
and publishes that such action is based on such a determination.”
§7607(b)(1). The second requirement is satisfied because EPA in-
cluded an express finding in its Federal Register notice. The Court
holds that EPA’s SIP disapprovals were not based on any determina-
tion of nationwide scope or effect.
   This requirement is met only if “a justification of nationwide breadth
is the primary explanation for and driver of EPA’s action.” Calumet,
605 U. S., at ___. Such a justification “does not rise to this level if EPA
also relied in significant part on other, ‘intensely factual’ considera-
tions, or if the key driver of EPA’s action is otherwise debatable.” Ibid.
EPA’s disapprovals fall into the latter category.
   EPA’s omnibus rule makes clear that its SIP disapprovals were
based on “a number of intensely factual determinations” particular to
each State. Texas v. EPA, 829 F. 3d 405, 421. EPA evaluated the con-
tents of each SIP “on their own merits,” considering state-specific facts
and information available to each State. 88 Fed. Reg. 9354. From this
state-specific analysis, EPA produced for each State a unique list of
“bases for disapproval.” Ibid. For Oklahoma, EPA rejected its attempt
to disclaim responsibility for certain emissions in Texas and faulted it
for “insufficient evaluation of additional emissions control opportuni-
ties.” Id., at 9359. For Utah, EPA found inadequate justification for
Utah’s attempt to discount certain emissions in Colorado, as well as
4                           OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                                  Syllabus

    “technical and legal flaws in the State’s arguments” regarding various
    emissions considerations. Id., at 9360.
       This state-specific analysis contrasts sharply with EPA’s justifica-
    tions in Calumet, where EPA made determinations that applied uni-
    formly to all small refineries and used them to reach a presumptive
    conclusion, considering refinery-specific facts only to confirm that
    there is no reason to depart from the presumptive disposition. Here,
    no nationwide factor settles EPA’s ultimate decisions. Instead, EPA
    disapproved Oklahoma’s and Utah’s SIPs after conducting predomi-
    nantly fact-intensive, state-specific analysis.
       The four determinations EPA proffers—use of updated 2016-based
    modeling, application of a 1% contribution threshold, determination
    that other States’ contributions could not excuse analyzing whether
    their own emissions significantly contribute downwind, and its posi-
    tion that States cannot rely on emission-reduction measures not incor-
    porated into state plans—qualify as determinations of nationwide
    scope or effect. But these conclusions are at most heuristics that aided
    EPA’s analysis rather than primary drivers of the disapprovals. None
    makes clear why EPA concluded that Oklahoma and Utah had pro-
    duced inadequate proposals for Good Neighbor compliance. For exam-
    ple, EPA’s 1% contribution threshold was used only for “screening”
    purposes to determine when further evaluation was needed, but “there
    was still a lot of work to be done” before EPA could issue disapprovals.
    Tr. of Oral Arg. 38. Pp. 9–13.
93 F. 4th 1262, reversed and remanded.

   THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SOTOMAYOR,
KAGAN, KAVANAUGH, BARRETT, and JACKSON, JJ., joined. GORSUCH, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
joined. ALITO, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
                        Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                         Nos. 23–1067 and 23–1068
                                   _________________


        OKLAHOMA, ET AL., PETITIONERS
23–1067              v.
     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

        PACIFICORP, ET AL., PETITIONERS
23–1068                v.
     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                                 [June 18, 2025]

  JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
  Petitioners seek judicial review of the Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) disapprovals of two state
emissions-control plans. These cases require us to decide
the proper venue for their challenges. The Clean Air Act
(CAA) channels these challenges to the U. S. Court of Ap-
peals for the D. C. Circuit if EPA’s disapprovals are “nation-
ally applicable,” and to a regional Circuit if they are “locally
or regionally applicable.” 42 U. S. C. §7607(b)(1). But, the
CAA contains an exception for certain “locally or regionally
applicable” actions “based on a determination of nationwide
scope or effect,” which also must be brought in the D. C. Cir-
cuit. Ibid. Applying the interpretation of §7607(b)(1) that
we outlined today in EPA v. Calumet Shreveport Refining,
L.L.C., 605 U. S. ___ (2025), we hold that EPA’s disapprov-
als are locally or regionally applicable actions reviewable in
a regional Circuit.
2                     OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                      Opinion of the Court

                                I
                                A
   The CAA’s venue provision, §7607(b)(1), dictates where
petitioners should challenge EPA actions taken under that
statute. This provision enumerates certain “nationally ap-
plicable” actions that must be brought in the D. C. Circuit,
and certain “locally or regionally applicable” actions that
must be brought in a regional Circuit. §7607(b)(1). It then
provides catchall clauses requiring the same treatment of
all other “nationally applicable” and “locally or regionally
applicable” actions. Ibid. But, §7607(b)(1) includes one ex-
ception to its default rule for locally or regionally applicable
actions: A challenge to such an action belongs in the D. C.
Circuit if (1) it “is based on a determination of nationwide
scope or effect,” and (2) “in taking such action [EPA] finds
and publishes that such action is based on such a determi-
nation.” Ibid.
   In Calumet, we explained that determining venue under
§7607(b)(1) requires a two-step inquiry. 605 U. S., at ___–
___ (slip op., at 6–7). At the first step, we identify the rele-
vant EPA “action” and ask whether it is “nationally appli-
cable” or only “locally or regionally applicable.” §7607(b)(1).
If the action is “nationally applicable,” then any challenge
to it belongs in the D. C. Circuit. Ibid. But, if the action is
“locally or regionally applicable,” then we proceed to the
second step, where we ask whether the “nationwide scope
or effect” exception applies to override §7607(b)(1)’s default
rule that “locally or regionally applicable” actions are re-
viewable only in the regional Circuits. Ibid. If the excep-
tion applies, then any challenge to the action must be
brought in the D. C. Circuit. Ibid.
                              B
  These cases arise from EPA’s review of “State implemen-
tation plans” (SIPs)—i.e., state proposals for how to comply
with an EPA “national primary or secondary ambient air
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                      Opinion of the Court

quality standard” (NAAQS). See §7410. The CAA makes
the SIP process one of federal-state collaboration. EPA first
sets a NAAQS, which “represents ‘the maximum airborne
concentration of [a] pollutant that the public health can tol-
erate.’ ” West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U. S. 697, 707 (2022);
see §7409(b). But, States bear “primary responsibility” for
deciding how a NAAQS should be attained. §7401(a)(3).
States must propose SIPs that “provid[e] for [the] imple-
mentation, maintenance, and enforcement” of a NAAQS
within their jurisdictions. §7410(a)(1). EPA then approves
or disapproves each SIP based on whether it meets the “ap-
plicable requirements” of the CAA. §7410(k)(3). If EPA dis-
approves a SIP, then EPA must issue a “[f]ederal imple-
mentation plan” for that State within two years.
§7410(c)(1). A State can avoid this outcome only if it “cor-
rects the deficiency” and gains EPA approval for its revised
SIP before EPA promulgates the federal plan. Ibid.
   In 2015, EPA triggered the SIP process by revising the
NAAQS for ozone to be more stringent. 80 Fed. Reg. 65294.
Each State in turn submitted a SIP, which, as relevant
here, detailed how the submitting State would comply with
the CAA’s “Good Neighbor” provision, §7410(a)(2)(D)(i)(I).
That provision accounts for the “externality” that
“[b]ecause air currents can carry pollution across state bor-
ders, emissions in upwind States sometimes affect air qual-
ity in downwind States.” Ohio v. Environmental Protection
Agency, 603 U. S. 279, 283–284 (2024). In particular, the
provision requires SIPs to “contain adequate provisions . . .
prohibiting” in-state “emissions activity” that would inter-
fere     with    other    States’    NAAQS       compliance.
§7410(a)(2)(D)(i)(I).
   EPA ultimately disapproved 21 States’ SIPs for failure to
comply with the “Good Neighbor” provision. 88 Fed. Reg.
9336 (2023). These States had all asserted in their SIPs
that they did not need to propose new emissions-reduction
4                          OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                           Opinion of the Court

measures in light of the new NAAQS. But, after consider-
ing “the contents of each individual state’s submission . . .
on their own merits” and making an individual determina-
tion with respect to each SIP, EPA disagreed. Id., at 9354.
   After making its individual determinations, EPA aggre-
gated its disapprovals into one omnibus Federal Register
rule. Id., at 9337–9338. The rule began by describing
EPA’s “4-step framework” for evaluating SIP submissions,
although EPA noted that it had also permitted States to
“presen[t] alternative approaches.” Id., at 9338.1 EPA then
provided for each State a “brief, high level overview” of its
“evaluation and key bases for disapproval,” while directing
readers to the “relevant Federal Register notifications of
proposed disapproval for each state” and certain other doc-
uments for the “full basis for the EPA’s disapprovals.” Id.,
at 9354 (boldface deleted).
   In its rule, EPA also asserted that its disapprovals would
be reviewable only in the D. C. Circuit. According to EPA,
the rule was a nationally applicable action under
§7607(b)(1). Id., at 9380. Alternatively, EPA made a find-
ing that, if the rule was only locally or regionally applicable,
then it fell within the “ ‘nationwide scope or effect’ ” excep-
tion. EPA identified as qualifying determinations of nation-
wide scope or effect its use of “the same, nationally con-
sistent 4-step . . . framework,” as well as its evaluation of
States’ alternative approaches “with an eye to ensuring na-
tional consistency and avoiding inconsistent or inequitable
results.” Id., at 9380–9381.
——————
   1 Under EPA’s four-step framework, the agency (1) identifies monitor-

ing sites that will likely have difficulty meeting the NAAQS; (2) identi-
fies upwind States that “impact those air quality problems . . . suffi-
ciently such that the states are considered ‘linked’ and therefore warrant
further review and analysis”; (3) “identif[ies] the emissions reductions
necessary (if any), . . . to eliminate each linked upwind state’s significant
contribution” to excess ozone at the downwind monitoring sites; and
(4) “adopt[s] permanent and enforceable measures needed to achieve
those emissions reductions.” 88 Fed. Reg. 9338.
                    Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                 5

                        Opinion of the Court

   Disregarding EPA’s conclusions, States and energy-industry
petitioners challenged EPA’s SIP disapprovals in the re-
gional Circuits. EPA moved to dismiss these challenges or
to transfer them to the D. C. Circuit, but its efforts have
been largely unsuccessful. Of the five Circuits to resolve
EPA’s motions, four have found that regional Circuit review
is proper.2
   Only the Tenth Circuit disagreed, granting EPA’s motion
to transfer suits brought by the States of Oklahoma and
Utah and by industry petitioners (collectively, petitioners).
93 F. 4th 1262, 1264 (2024). In its view, EPA’s omnibus
rule disapproving the 21 SIPs constituted a single, nation-
ally applicable action. Id., at 1266. Rejecting petitioners’
contention that each individual SIP disapproval constitutes
its own “action,” the Tenth Circuit concluded that the rele-
vant “action” is simply whatever EPA has “chosen to issue.”
Id., at 1267. Thus, because EPA had grouped its disapprov-
als into a single rule, that rule constituted the “action” at
hand. See id., at 1266–1267. And, the Tenth Circuit con-
cluded, this action was nationally applicable given both its
geographical breadth and the nature of its analysis: EPA’s
rule covered “21 states across the country” and reflected
EPA’s “appli[cation of] a uniform statutory interpretation
and common analytical methods.” Id., at 1266. The Tenth
Circuit accordingly transferred petitioners’ challenges to
the D. C. Circuit. Id., at 1264. We granted certiorari to
review that transfer decision. 604 U. S. ___ (2024).
                             II
  Applying our Calumet framework, we begin with the first
step of the §7607(b)(1) inquiry. As explained, at this step,
we must identify the relevant EPA “action” and then decide
——————
  2 See West Virginia v. EPA, 90 F. 4th 323, 325 (CA4 2024); Texas v.

EPA, 132 F. 4th 808, 830 (CA5 2025); Kentucky v. EPA, 123 F. 4th 447,
452 (CA6 2024); Order in Arkansas v. EPA, No. 23–1320, ECF Doc.
5269098 (CA8, Apr. 25, 2023).
6                        OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

whether it is nationally applicable or only locally or region-
ally applicable. 605 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 7–9). We
conclude that the EPA “action” in these cases is not EPA’s
omnibus rule, but rather its individual denials of the Okla-
homa and Utah SIPs. Clearly, these denials are locally or
regionally applicable.
                                A
   As we recognized in Calumet, “[b]ecause §7607(b)(1) pegs
venue to the scope of the EPA action being challenged, our
threshold task is to identify the ‘action’ at issue.” Id., at ___
(slip op., at 7). Only when we understand the relevant “ac-
tion” can we decide whether it is nationally applicable or
locally or regionally applicable—that is, whether it facially
applies “throughout the entire country, or only to particular
localities or regions.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 9). Here, as in
Calumet, our resolution of the threshold question effec-
tively resolves the proper classification.3
   An “action” under §7607(b)(1) is a “particular exercis[e] of
EPA authority undertaken pursuant to [a] particular CAA
provisio[n].” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 8). We thus determine
the relevant “action” by reference to the CAA provision un-
der which EPA has acted. This focus on the operative CAA
provision means that the relevant “action” will not neces-
sarily track how EPA has presented its decision. For exam-
ple, in Calumet, we held that, whenever EPA denies a small
refinery’s petition for an exemption from the CAA’s renew-
able fuel program, each individual exemption denial consti-
tutes its own “action” because §7545(o)(9)(B) defines EPA’s
role—“ ‘evaluating a petition’ ” and “ ‘act[ing] on’ ” it—on a
petition-specific basis. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 10) (alteration
——————
  3 As in Calumet, we need not decide the precise line between a “nation-

ally applicable” and a “locally or regionally applicable” action under
§7607(b)(1). That question may raise difficult questions in edge cases
given the binary nature of these categories. See 605 U. S., at ___–___,
n. 3 (slip op., at 9–10, n. 3).
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             7

                     Opinion of the Court

omitted). That statutory denomination controls even if
EPA chooses to resolve multiple petitions in one fell swoop,
as it did in Calumet. Id., at ___–___ (slip op., at 10–11).
  Here too, we conclude that each EPA SIP disapproval
constitutes its own “action.” We therefore reject EPA’s con-
tention, adopted by the Tenth Circuit, that EPA’s omnibus
rule should be treated as a single “action.” Instead, we have
before us two distinct “actions”—EPA’s respective disap-
provals of the Oklahoma and Utah SIPs.
  Section 7607(b)(1) simplifies our analysis of this issue.
The CAA enumerates an individual SIP approval as an ex-
ample of a locally or regionally applicable action, unlike in
Calumet, where we dealt with an EPA decision that did not
fall within any of §7607(b)(1)’s enumerated actions. Section
7607(b)(1) provides:
    “A petition for review of the Administrator’s action in
    approving or promulgating any implementation plan
    under section 7410 of this title . . . , [other enumerated
    examples], . . . or any other final action of the Adminis-
    trator under this chapter (including any denial or dis-
    approval by the Administrator under subchapter I)
    which is locally or regionally applicable may be filed
    only in the United States Court of Appeals for the ap-
    propriate circuit.”
    A SIP is an “implementation plan under section 7410,”
and §7607(b)(1)—in referring expressly to EPA’s “action in
approving . . . any implementation plan” under that provi-
sion—makes clear that each EPA SIP approval is its own
action.
    It follows that each EPA SIP disapproval is also its own
action. EPA undertakes SIP disapprovals pursuant to the
same CAA authority underlying its SIP approvals. Namely,
§7410 directs “[e]ach State” to “adopt and submit [to EPA]
. . . a plan” for NAAQS implementation, and in turn directs
EPA to either “approve such submittal” or “disapprove” it.
8                         OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

§§7410(a)(1), (k). Thus, EPA’s approvals and disapprovals
are opposite sides of the same coin. As §7410’s SIP-specific
focus makes clear, and §7607(b)(1)’s enumeration confirms,
the CAA treats both individual SIP approvals and individ-
ual SIP disapprovals as discrete actions. Thus, we have be-
fore us two EPA actions—EPA’s disapprovals of the Okla-
homa and Utah SIPs.
   These two disapprovals are undisputedly locally or re-
gionally applicable actions. A SIP is a state-specific plan,
so an EPA disapproval on its face applies only to the State
that proposed the SIP. And, the CAA recognizes this lim-
ited scope in enumerating a SIP approval as a locally or re-
gionally applicable action. §7607(b)(1). If anything, EPA’s
decision on an individual SIP “is the prototypical ‘locally or
regionally applicable’ action,” as courts have recognized and
even EPA acknowledges. American Road & Transp. Build-
ers Assn. v. EPA, 705 F. 3d 453, 455 (CADC 2013) (majority
opinion of Kavanaugh, J.); see Brief for Respondents 25.4
                               B
  EPA’s and the Tenth Circuit’s contrary arguments do not
survive scrutiny. EPA largely reprises the arguments it
made in Calumet, and we reject those arguments for the
reasons explained there. 605 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at
10–12). In short, §7607(b)(1) “makes the CAA’s framing of
the relevant ‘action’ controlling, regardless of how EPA
chooses to package its decisions in the Federal Register.”
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 8). Thus, although EPA was free to

——————
   4 We leave for another day the meaning of the parenthetical in

§7607(b)(1), which specifies that “any other final action . . . (including
any denial or disapproval by the Administrator under subchapter I)
which is locally or regionally applicable” is subject to the default of re-
gional Circuit review. Because we hold that EPA’s SIP disapprovals are
locally or regionally applicable in any event, we need not consider peti-
tioners’ argument that this parenthetical makes all denials or disapprov-
als under subchapter I of the CAA locally or regionally applicable actions.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)              9

                      Opinion of the Court

aggregate its SIP disapprovals into one rule, that aggrega-
tion has no significance for venue purposes.
   The Tenth Circuit’s endorsement of EPA’s position is
equally unpersuasive. On its view, we must accept EPA’s
framing of the relevant “action” because EPA’s “action” is
just whatever it has “chosen to issue.” 93 F. 4th, at 1267.
But, that reasoning fails to grapple with what §7607(b)(1)
means by that word. In context, §7607(b)(1) defines the rel-
evant “action” by reference to the underlying CAA provi-
sion, not EPA’s stylization. Calumet, 605 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 8); supra, at 6–7.
   Nor can the Tenth Circuit deem EPA’s actions nationally
applicable based on EPA’s use of a “uniform statutory inter-
pretation and common analytical methods.” 93 F. 4th, at
1266. The “applicability” of an action turns on its formal
geographical scope: An action “applies” nationally only if,
on its face, it has binding effect throughout the country.
Calumet, 605 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9). In contrast, EPA’s
interpretive and analytical methodology goes to its under-
lying reasoning. That component matters only at the sec-
ond §7607(b)(1) step, where one prerequisite for D. C. Cir-
cuit review is that a locally or regionally applicable action
nonetheless be “based on a determination of nationwide
scope or effect.” We would make a hash of the CAA’s venue
framework if we looked to the basis for EPA’s actions at the
first step too.
                              III
   Because EPA’s SIP disapprovals are only locally or re-
gionally applicable, we move to the second step of the
§7607(b)(1) inquiry. At this step, “we ask whether the ‘na-
tionwide scope or effect’ exception applies to override the
default of regional Circuit review for locally or regionally
applicable actions.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 13). We hold that
it does not: The exception does not apply here, so these
cases properly belong in a regional Circuit.
10                    OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                      Opinion of the Court

   Our analysis turns on the first of the “nationwide scope
or effect” exception’s two requirements. That exception ap-
plies only if the action at issue (1) “is based on a determina-
tion of nationwide scope or effect,” and (2) “in taking such
action [EPA] finds and publishes that such action is based
on such a determination.” §7607(b)(1). Here, the second
requirement is plainly satisfied: EPA included in its Fed-
eral Register notice an express finding that its SIP disap-
provals were “based on a determination of ‘nationwide
scope or effect.’ ” 88 Fed. Reg. 9380. Thus, our task is to
decide whether that finding was correct.
   We hold that EPA’s SIP disapprovals were not based on
any determination of nationwide scope or effect. As we ex-
plained in Calumet, this requirement is met only if “a justi-
fication of nationwide breadth is the primary explanation
for and driver of EPA’s action.” 605 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 15). But, such a justification “does not rise to this level
if EPA also relied in significant part on other, ‘intensely fac-
tual’ considerations, or if the key driver of EPA’s action is
otherwise debatable.” Ibid. EPA’s disapprovals of the Ok-
lahoma and Utah SIPs fall into the latter category.
   EPA’s omnibus rule makes clear that its SIP disapprovals
were based on “a number of intensely factual determina-
tions” particular to the State at issue. Texas v. EPA, 829
F. 3d 405, 421 (CA5 2016). As EPA explained, it evaluated
the contents of each SIP “on their own merits,” “con-
sider[ing] the facts and information . . . available to the
state at the time of its submission,” as well as more recent
information regarding that State’s circumstances. 88 Fed.
Reg. 9354. From this state-specific analysis, EPA produced
for each State a list of “bases for disapproval,” ibid., with
each list “giving a unique mixture of reasons,” West Virginia
v. EPA, 90 F. 4th 323, 330 (CA4 2024). For example, as to
Oklahoma, EPA rejected its attempt to disclaim responsi-
bility for certain emissions in Texas, while also faulting it
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                      Opinion of the Court

for providing an “insufficient evaluation of additional emis-
sions control opportunities.” 88 Fed. Reg. 9359. And, as to
Utah, EPA found that the State had inadequately justified
its attempt to discount certain emissions in Colorado, while
also “find[ing] technical and legal flaws in the State’s argu-
ments” regarding various emissions considerations. Id., at
9360. Based on these and other reasons, EPA concluded
that each State had failed to submit a SIP with “the neces-
sary provisions to eliminate emissions” consistent with that
State’s Good Neighbor obligations. 87 Fed. Reg. 9824,
31843 (2022).
   This state-specific analysis contrasts sharply with EPA’s
justifications in Calumet, where we found the “nationwide
scope or effect” exception triggered. There, EPA made two
determinations that applied uniformly to all small refiner-
ies across the country, which it used to reach a presumptive
conclusion as to how the exemption petitions before it
should be resolved. 605 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 17–
18). EPA considered refinery-specific facts only to “confirm
that it had no reason to depart from its presumptive dispo-
sition.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 18). In that circumstance,
we explained, EPA’s national determinations constituted
“the most important parts of its reasoning” and “the pri-
mary driver of its decision.” Ibid.
   Here, in contrast, no nationwide factor all but settles
EPA’s ultimate decisions. Instead, EPA disapproved Okla-
homa’s and Utah’s SIPs after conducting predominantly
fact-intensive, state-specific analysis.
   The determinations that EPA proffers as the basis of its
disapprovals only reinforce this conclusion. Before this
Court, EPA points to four determinations: (1) its use of “up-
dated, 2016-based modeling as the ‘primary’ basis for its
‘assessment of air quality conditions and pollution contri-
bution’ ”; (2) its application of “a 1% contribution threshold
across all States to assess whether a State contributed more
than a de minimis amount of ozone pollution downwind”;
12                        OKLAHOMA v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

(3) its “determin[ation] that the relative contributions of
other States or countries could not excuse a State from an-
alyzing whether its own emissions ‘significantly’ contribute
to downwind nonattainment”; and (4) its position that an
upwind “State cannot rely on emission-reduction measures
that are not actually incorporated into its state plan.” Brief
for Respondents 34–35. We agree with EPA that these con-
clusions qualify as determinations of nationwide scope or
effect, in that they are conclusions that apply nationwide,
either formally or as a practical matter given EPA’s rejec-
tion of alternative approaches. But, these conclusions are
at most heuristics that aided EPA’s analysis, as opposed to
the primary drivers of its disapprovals. None of these de-
terminations, either alone or in combination, makes clear
why EPA concluded that Oklahoma and Utah had produced
inadequate proposals for compliance with their Good
Neighbor obligations.5
   Take, for example, EPA’s use of the 1% contribution
threshold. This threshold—which is triggered whenever an
upwind State contributes at least 1% of the permissible
ozone level to a downwind State—refers to EPA’s measure
of when an upwind State becomes “ ‘linked’ to a downwind
air quality problem,” so as to implicate potential Good
Neighbor obligations. 88 Fed. Reg. 9342; see supra, at 4,
n. 1. EPA used this threshold only for “screening” purposes:
Where the threshold was triggered, EPA would “further
evaluate” the upwind State’s emissions, to assess whether
those emissions require ameliorative steps under the CAA.

——————
  5 The determinations that EPA invokes before this Court differ from

the ones that it cited in its original finding, where it focused primarily
on its use of a “consistent 4-step . . . framework” to analyze the SIPs. 88
Fed. Reg. 9380–9381; supra, at 4. Because we find the determinations
EPA currently invokes to be inadequate, we need not decide whether
EPA’s shift in position raises a preservation problem. See EPA v. Calu-
met Shreveport Refining, L.L.C., 605 U. S. ___, ___, n. 4 (2025) (slip op.,
at 17, n. 4).
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                    13

                          Opinion of the Court

88 Fed. Reg. 9342, 9371. But, this kind of analytical guide-
post cannot be deemed the primary driver of EPA’s ultimate
conclusion that Oklahoma’s and Utah’s SIPs were deficient.
As EPA does not dispute, even after it made its threshold
determination, “there was still a lot of work to be done” be-
fore EPA could issue its disapprovals. Tr. of Oral Arg. 38.
In that circumstance, we cannot say that the “nationwide
scope or effect” exception applies.6
                        *     *    *
  The Tenth Circuit erred in holding that petitioners’ chal-
lenges should be reviewed in the D. C. Circuit. EPA’s dis-
approvals of the Oklahoma and Utah SIPs are locally or re-
gionally applicable actions. And, these cases are not ones
where the “nationwide scope or effect” exception applies.
Accordingly, as with most locally or regionally applicable
actions, petitioners’ challenges can be heard only in a re-
gional Circuit. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is re-
versed, and the cases are remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
                                            It is so ordered.

  JUSTICE ALITO took no part in the consideration or deci-
sion of these cases.




——————
   6 EPA’s case for the exception’s applicability rests on arguments that

we rejected in Calumet. Most notably, we rejected EPA’s position that
its action is “based on” a qualifying determination so long as that deter-
mination supplies a but-for cause. See id., at ___ (slip op., at 15). We
need not revisit here the problems with EPA’s premise.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

               GORSUCH, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                   Nos. 23–1067 and 23–1068
                          _________________


        OKLAHOMA, ET AL., PETITIONERS
23–1067              v.
     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

        PACIFICORP, ET AL., PETITIONERS
23–1068                v.
     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                         [June 18, 2025]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins,
concurring in the judgment.
   The Court holds that the proper venue for this litigation
lies in an appropriate regional circuit, not in the D. C. Cir-
cuit. I agree. As I explain in today’s companion case, how-
ever, the Court and I arrive at that conclusion by different
paths. See EPA v. Calumet Shreveport Refining, L.L.C.,
605 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2025) (GORSUCH, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 13–14). Accordingly, I am unable to join the Court’s
opinion, but I am pleased to concur in its judgment.