(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

  WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL.
                    HEATH

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

 No. 23–1127. Argued November 4, 2024—Decided February 21, 2025
The E-Rate (short for Education-Rate) program, established under the
  Telecommunications Act of 1996, subsidizes internet and other tele-
  communications services for schools and libraries across the United
  States. To finance those subsidies, Congress required that telecommu-
  nications carriers pay into a fund (now known as the Universal Service
  Fund) that is administered by the Universal Service Administrative
  Company, a private not-for-profit corporation. The Company collects
  and distributes the resulting pot of money to beneficiaries pursuant to
  regulations prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission
  (FCC). In addition to providing for subsidies, those regulations impose
  upon carriers a rule called the “lowest corresponding price” rule, which
  prohibits them from charging schools and libraries more than what
  they would charge a “similarly situated” non-residential customer.
  Once an appropriate charge is set, a school can obtain its subsidy by
  paying the carrier a discounted price and requiring the carrier to seek
  the remainder from the Fund, or by paying the carrier full freight and
  then applying for reimbursement from the Fund.
     Respondent Todd Heath is an auditor of telecommunications bills
  who believes that petitioner Wisconsin Bell defrauded the E-Rate pro-
  gram out of millions of dollars. According to Heath, Wisconsin Bell
  consistently overcharged schools in violation of the “lowest correspond-
  ing price” rule. Heath brought suit under the False Claims Act (FCA),
  which enables private parties to bring civil actions on the Govern-
  ment’s behalf to protect federal programs and funds from fraud. The
  FCA imposes civil liability on any person who “knowingly presents, or
  causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim” as statutorily de-
  fined. 31 U. S. C. §3729(a)(1)(A). In Heath’s view, Wisconsin Bell’s
2   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                               Syllabus

 violations of the “lowest corresponding price” rule led to reimburse-
 ment requests for amounts higher than the E-Rate program should
 have paid. The premise of Heath’s suit is that an E-Rate reimburse-
 ment request can give rise to FCA liability because it qualifies as a
 “claim,” which, as relevant here, requires the Government to “pro-
 vide[ ] or ha[ve] provided any portion of the money” requested.
 §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I).
    Wisconsin Bell moved to dismiss Heath’s suit. In its view, an E-rate
 reimbursement request can never qualify as a “claim” under the FCA
 because the money comes from private carriers and is handled by a
 private corporation, meaning the Government does not “provide[ ] any
 portion of the money” requested. The District Court and the Seventh
 Circuit rejected that argument. The Court of Appeals held that the
 Government “provided” E-Rate program funding for two independent
 reasons. First, it held that the Government provided all the money in
 the program through its regulatory role in the collection and distribu-
 tion of contributions. Second and more narrowly, it found that the
 Government provided some “portion” of E-Rate funding by depositing
 into the Fund, in the relevant years, more than $100 million directly
 from the U. S. Treasury.
Held: The E-Rate reimbursement requests at issue are “claims” under
 the FCA because the Government “provided” (at a minimum) a “por-
 tion” of the money applied for by transferring more than $100 million
 from the Treasury into the Fund. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). The question
 is whether the Government “provided”—in ordinary meaning, sup-
 plied, furnished, or made available—any portion of the money sought.
 While the parties (mirroring the Seventh Circuit’s opinion) discuss two
 independent theories under which the Government potentially “pro-
 vided” the requested funds, here it is enough that the Government pro-
 vided some E-Rate moneys through the Treasury’s own transfer of over
 $100 million into the Fund. That amount consisted of delinquent con-
 tributions that the FCC and Treasury Department collected from car-
 riers, as well as civil settlements and criminal restitution payments
 from Justice Department activities in response to wrongdoing in the
 E-Rate program. The Government therefore “provided [a] portion of
 the money” disbursed from the Fund to reimburse E-Rate program
 participants.
    Wisconsin Bell argues that even the $100 million was provided only
 by the carriers, with the Government playing no more than an inter-
 mediary role. But to start with, Wisconsin Bell mischaracterizes the
 Government’s role. Rather than acting as a passive throughway for
 the transmission of the $100 million, it generated that money itself by
 extracting it from carriers and by prosecuting wrongdoing in the E-
 Rate program. And anyway, a simple intermediary can sometimes also
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     3

                                Syllabus

  “provide” things to a recipient—and the Government, even if viewed
  only in that light, would do so here. For example, a proctor for an exam
  “provides” blue books and pencils to students, even if she has not pur-
  chased them herself and has instead gotten them from the school. The
  same is true here: The Government “provided” the relevant $100 mil-
  lion to the Fund by collecting it and routing it through Treasury ac-
  counts.
     Here, in the years relevant to Heath’s FCA suit, the Government
  “provided” a “portion of the money requested” for E-Rate subsidies by
  collecting, holding, and transferring $100 million by way of the Treas-
  ury. Indeed, those transfers look like most Government spending:
  Money usually comes to the Government from private parties, and it
  then usually goes out to the broader community to fund programs and
  activities. That conclusion is enough to enable Heath’s FCA suit to
  proceed. Pp. 7–14.
92 F. 4th 654, affirmed and remanded.

   KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. THOMAS, J.,
filed a concurring opinion, in which KAVANAUGH, J., joined, and in which
ALITO, J., joined as to Part I. KAVANAUGH, J., filed a concurring opinion,
in which THOMAS, J., joined.
                        Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 23–1127
                                   _________________


  WISCONSIN BELL, INC., PETITIONER v. UNITED
         STATES, EX REL. TODD HEATH
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
                              [February 21, 2025]

  JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
  The E-Rate (short for Education-Rate) program subsi-
dizes internet and other telecommunications services for
schools and libraries across the United States. Established
under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 56,
the program disburses funds—collected from telecommuni-
cations carriers and managed by a private corporation—to
cover a substantial percentage of a school’s internet costs.
The funds are payable, under Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) regulations, to either a carrier or a
school upon receipt of a reimbursement request.
  This case asks us to decide whether such a request can
count as a “claim” under the False Claims Act (FCA or Act),
31 U. S. C. §§3729–3733. The FCA protects government
funds and programs by imposing civil liability on any per-
son who knowingly presents a false or fraudulent “claim” as
statutorily defined. In the part of the definition relevant
here, a request for money qualifies as a claim if the Govern-
ment “provides or has provided any portion of the
money . . . requested.” §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). We hold today
that the E-Rate reimbursement requests at issue satisfy
that requirement because the Government provided (at a
2   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                     Opinion of the Court

minimum) a “portion” of the money applied for. In the years
in which those requests were made, the Government trans-
ferred more than $100 million from the Treasury into the
pool of funds used to pay E-Rate subsidies. That is enough
to create a “claim” under the Act, and to allow a suit alleg-
ing fraud to go forward.
                               I
   Congress and the FCC have long worked to ensure that
“all the people of the United States” have access, at reason-
able prices, to telecommunications and information ser-
vices. 47 U. S. C. §151; see §254(b). In keeping with that
goal, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 directed the FCC
to establish several so-called universal-service programs for
populations or institutions needing improved access. See
§254. That statute identified, for example, consumers in
rural areas, consumers with low incomes, and—critical
here—elementary schools, secondary schools, and libraries
as appropriate recipients of subsidies or other assistance.
See §§254(b), (h)(1).
   To finance those measures, Congress required that tele-
communications carriers pay into a fund—now known as
the Universal Service Fund—as FCC regulations prescribe.
See §254(d). Under those rules, the FCC determines each
quarter the percentage of revenues that a carrier must con-
tribute. See 47 CFR §§54.706, 54.709(a) (2023). The FCC,
however, does not manage the Fund’s day-to-day opera-
tions. Rather, it has “appointed” the Universal Service Ad-
ministrative Company, a private not-for-profit corporation,
as the Fund’s “Administrator.” §54.701(a); see App. 34.
The Administrative Company generally bills and collects
contributions from carriers—though the FCC plays a role
in pursuing delinquents. See §54.702; App. 37–38, 40–43;
infra, at 8. And the Company distributes the resulting pot
of money, as FCC rules provide, to program beneficiaries.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    3

                          Opinion of the Court

See §54.702(b).1
   Among those beneficiaries are public and private schools
and libraries, under what is commonly called the E-Rate
program. See 47 U. S. C. §§254(b)(6), (h)(1)(B); 47 CFR
§54.500 et seq. That program subsidizes between 20 and 90
percent of a school’s total charges for internet and other tel-
ecommunications services, with higher percentages for
schools in rural or low-income areas. See §§54.505(a)–(c).
And the program protects the value of that subsidy by pre-
venting a carrier from inflating its non-discounted prices.
Under the “lowest corresponding price” rule, a carrier may
not charge a school a higher sticker price than it would
charge a “similarly situated” customer.              §§54.500,
54.511(b). Once an appropriate charge is set, a school can
obtain its subsidy in either of two ways. See §54.514(c).
The school can pay the carrier only the discounted price,
thus requiring the carrier to seek the remainder from mon-
eys held in the Fund. Or the school can pay the carrier full
freight and itself apply for reimbursement.
   Respondent Todd Heath is an auditor of telecommunica-
tions bills who believes that petitioner Wisconsin Bell de-
frauded the E-Rate program out of millions of dollars. Ac-
cording to Heath, the carrier flouted the FCC’s “lowest
corresponding price” rule for more than a decade (from 2002
to 2015) by charging schools a higher full price than it
charged other, similarly situated customers. And as Heath
notes, overcharges of that kind inevitably lead to overpay-
ments from the Fund. Take a hypothetical example. If the
lowest corresponding price for a service is $1,000 and a

——————
   1 The precise relationship between the FCC and the Administrative

Company is in dispute in other litigation. See, e.g., Consumers’ Research
v. FCC, 109 F. 4th 743, 750 (CA5) (en banc), cert. granted, 604 U. S. ___
(2024). The details of that relationship are irrelevant here, and we ex-
press no views on that score. Nor do we comment on any other matter
pertaining to the constitutionality of the universal-service programs.
4   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                      Opinion of the Court

school is entitled to a 60% subsidy, then the E-Rate pro-
gram should pay out $600. But if Wisconsin Bell, in viola-
tion of the rule, instead charged the school a full price of
$1,500, then the program would instead confer a subsidy of
$900. (And the school, rather than pay $400, would pay
$600.) The carrier, in Heath’s view, thus wrongly amassed
revenues at the E-Rate program’s expense.
   That accusation is at the heart of a lawsuit Heath
brought against Wisconsin Bell under the FCA. Enacted
during the Civil War to protect federal programs and funds
from fraud, that law enables private parties to bring civil
actions on the Government’s behalf, and to share in any
monetary recovery. See United States ex rel. Polansky v.
Executive Health Resources, Inc., 599 U. S. 419, 424–425
(2023). A defendant is liable under the Act if it “knowingly
presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent
claim for payment.” 31 U. S. C. §3729(a)(1)(A). In Heath’s
view, Wisconsin Bell engaged in that conduct many times
over by way of violating the FCC’s “lowest corresponding
price” rule. App. 62–82 (complaint). All those violations led
to reimbursement requests, by either Wisconsin Bell or a
school, for amounts higher than the E-Rate program should
have had to pay. Plus, all Wisconsin Bell’s own requests
included a false certification (or so Heath alleged) that it
had complied with the program’s rules, including the one
about pricing.
   The premise of Heath’s suit is that an E-Rate reimburse-
ment request can give rise to FCA liability because it fits
within the statute’s definition of the term “claim.” That def-
inition varies depending on whether a “request or demand”
for money is made to a federal employee or agent, or instead
to an “other recipient.” §3729(b)(2)(A). Assuming that the
Administrative Company—the recipient of E-Rate reim-
bursement requests—falls within the “other” rather than
the “agent” category, such a request must meet two require-
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      5

                           Opinion of the Court

ments to count as an FCA “claim.”2 First, the money re-
quested must be “spent or used on the Government’s behalf
or to advance a Government program or interest.”
§3729(b)(2)(A)(ii). And second, the Government must “pro-
vide[ ] or ha[ve] provided any portion of the money” re-
quested. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). The statutory definition,
though, also offers a caveat: It is immaterial, in assessing
whether those requirements are met, “whether or not the
United States has title to the money” at issue.
§3729(b)(2)(A).3
  Wisconsin Bell moved to dismiss Heath’s suit, arguing
that under the FCA’s definition an E-Rate reimbursement
request can never qualify as a “claim.” The carrier did not
deny that the money so requested “advance[s] a Govern-
ment program,” as the definition first requires. That
money, after all, simply is the E-Rate program’s subsidy.
But Wisconsin Bell contended that an E-Rate reimburse-
ment request flunks the second requirement, because the
Government does not “provide[ ] any portion of the money”
——————
   2 The parties have disputed throughout this litigation whether the Ad-

ministrative Company is actually an “agent” of the United States, and
therefore not subject to the two requirements about to be described. But
our disposition of this case makes that issue immaterial, and we there-
fore express no view of its merits. See infra, at 6, n. 4 (noting the Court
of Appeals’ treatment of the question).
   3 Congress’s most recent amendments to the “claim” definition (which

included adding the title provision) occurred in 2009, after some of the
disputed reimbursement requests were made. But Wisconsin Bell does
not contend that those amendments require separate analysis of the pre-
and post-2009 requests to resolve the issues we address. In discussing
those issues, the carrier cites the current definition and describes the
amendments (including the title provision) as merely clarifying existing
law. See Brief for Wisconsin Bell 24–25, 39; Reply Brief 5–6. We assume
without deciding that its characterization is correct, and thus use only
the FCA’s current definition of “claim.” Cf. Universal Health Services,
Inc. v. United States ex rel. Escobar, 579 U. S. 176, 185, n. 1 (2016) (not-
ing in another FCA case involving both pre- and post-2009 requests that
no party argued and “we thus do not consider[ ] whether pre-2009 con-
duct should be treated differently”).
6   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                        Opinion of the Court

requested. In Wisconsin Bell’s view, all the money in the
E-Rate program is “private,” rather than “federal.” No.
2:08–cv–00724 (ED Wis., Nov. 25, 2014), ECF Doc. 97, p. 6.
That is because the money comes from private carriers’ con-
tributions, and a private corporation handles its collection
and disbursement. See id., at 12–13. “The federal govern-
ment,” Wisconsin Bell averred, does not provide “a single
penny to the Fund.” Id., at 12.
   After the District Court denied the motion, the Court of
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit held that E-Rate reim-
bursement requests fit the FCA’s definition of “claim.” The
Court of Appeals found two “independent paths” for con-
cluding, contra Wisconsin Bell, that the Government “pro-
vided” E-Rate program funding. 92 F. 4th 654, 666 (2024).
First, the court held that the Government provided all the
money in the program through its regulatory role in the
“collection and distribution” of contributions—most nota-
bly, by initially requiring the carriers to pay into the Fund.
Id., at 671; see id., at 669. Second and more narrowly, the
court found that the Government provided some “portion”
of E-Rate funding by depositing into the Fund, in the rele-
vant years, “more than $100 million directly from the U.S.
Treasury.” Id., at 667. That contribution of Treasury
money, even if a small part of the Fund’s total, was enough
to qualify the E-Rate reimbursement requests as FCA
“claims.” See ibid.4
   In a similar case, the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Cir-
cuit held that E-Rate reimbursement requests do not so
qualify—although that court considered only the “broad[er]
view” of how the Government “provides” E-Rate funding.
United States ex rel. Shupe v. Cisco Systems, Inc., 759 F. 3d
——————
  4 Finding yet a third path to the same outcome, the Seventh Circuit

also held that the Administrative Company is an “agent” of the Govern-
ment. See 92 F. 4th, at 667–668. As noted above, that conclusion (if
correct) obviates the FCA’s requirement that the Government “provide”
any part of the requested money. See supra, at 5, n. 2.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                      Opinion of the Court

379, 383–384 (2014) (per curiam); id., at 387–388 (finding
the FCC’s “regulatory supervision” of the program insuffi-
cient to show that the Government provided E-Rate funds).
   We granted certiorari to resolve the circuit split over
whether E-Rate reimbursement requests are FCA “claims.”
602 U. S. ___ (2024). We need reach no further today than
the narrower ($100 million) ground on which the court be-
low ruled. The requests at issue qualify as claims because,
in the years they were submitted, the U. S. Treasury depos-
ited money into the Fund for disbursement to those entitled
to E-Rate subsidies.
                               II
  The E-Rate reimbursement requests at issue count as
FCA “claims” if the Government “provides or has provided
any portion of the money” requested. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I).
Is that language satisfied when a school or carrier asks for
E-Rate program funds? Because the Act does not define the
word “provides,” we look to its ordinary meaning. To “pro-
vide” means to “supply,” to “furnish,” or to “make available.”
American Heritage Dictionary 1411 (4th ed. 2000); 12 Ox-
ford English Dictionary 713 (2d ed. 1989); see Little Sisters
of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home v. Pennsylvania,
591 U. S. 657, 676 (2020) (defining “provide” the same way).
The question thus becomes whether the Government sup-
plied, furnished, or made available any portion of the
money here sought.
  The parties’ arguments on that score mirror the two “in-
dependent paths” laid out in the Seventh Circuit’s opinion.
92 F. 4th, at 666; see supra, at 6. Wisconsin Bell and Heath
dispute whether the Government provides all E-Rate mon-
eys through its regulatory authority over the program, es-
pecially its mandate that carriers contribute to the Fund.
But so too the parties contest whether the Government has
provided some E-Rate moneys through the Treasury’s own
8   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                     Opinion of the Court

transfer into the Fund of over $100 million, to pay for pro-
gram subsidies.
   If Heath prevails on either one of those theories, he has
met the FCA’s definition of “claim.” Under that definition,
providing some funds is just as good as providing all: The
Government, recall, need provide only “any portion” of the
amount requested. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I); see United States
ex rel. DRC, Inc. v. Custer Battles, LLC, 562 F. 3d 295, 303
(CA4 2009) (“So long as ‘any portion’ of the claim is or will
be funded by U.S. money,” the “full claim satisfies the def-
inition”). Wisconsin Bell acknowledges that point, as it
must. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 24. So if the Government, by
making direct payments, has provided even a small fraction
of the money used to fund E-Rate reimbursements, the
question presented here is resolved. It is then immaterial
whether the Government, by exercising regulatory control,
provides all the money so used. Even supposing not, the
reimbursement requests are “claims” for payment, and
Heath’s suit for fraud can go forward.
   And as the Court of Appeals explained, the Govern-
ment—more specifically, the U. S. Treasury—has put sub-
stantial money into the Fund to finance E-Rate subsidies.
See 92 F. 4th, at 667. The more than $100 million deposited
in the relevant years came from two sources. About half
consisted of delinquent contributions (plus associated inter-
est and penalties) that the FCC and Treasury Department
collected from carriers after the Administrative Company
proved unable to do so. Those federal agencies, acting un-
der a law providing for the collection of sums “owed to the
United States,” placed the money they garnered in Treas-
ury accounts. 31 U. S. C. §3701(b)(1); see §§3711, 3717;
App. 35–38, 40–43. From there, the Treasury made peri-
odic transfers to the Fund for disbursement to program par-
ticipants. See id., at 37–38, 42–43. The other half of the
$100 million derived from Justice Department activities.
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      9

                           Opinion of the Court

See id., at 38, 43. When that Department learns of wrong-
doing in the E-Rate program, its lawyers may proceed in
diverse ways against the malefactors—maybe under the
FCA itself, or under antitrust laws, or under criminal bans
on mail or wire fraud. Any civil settlements or criminal res-
titution payments resulting from those actions go into
Treasury accounts. And once again, that money eventually
makes its way to the Fund to bankroll E-Rate subsidies.
   So to return to the language of the relevant definitional
provision: The Government “provided [a] portion of the
money” disbursed from the Fund to reimburse E-Rate pro-
gram participants. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). Or to use the syn-
onyms previously offered: The Government supplied funds,
furnished funds, and made available funds for that purpose.
It is a simple matter, as the saying goes, of following the
money. Again, federal agencies accumulated the roughly
$100 million and placed it in the U. S. Treasury—the repos-
itory for “all monies received by the United States.” K.
Stith, Congress’ Power of the Purse, 97 Yale L. J. 1343,
1356 (1988). And the Treasury later transferred those
sums to the Fund for use in fulfilling E-Rate reimburse-
ment requests. Or as the Seventh Circuit put the point:
Because the Treasury held and conveyed to the Fund the
$100 million, “quite literally, the Treasury provide[d]
money to the E-Rate program.” 92 F. 4th, at 670.5
——————
   5 The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, although rejecting the reg-

ulatory-control theory of providing funds, never addressed the alterna-
tive, follow-the-money theory just described. See United States ex rel.
Shupe v. Cisco Systems, Inc., 759 F. 3d 379, 382–388 (2014) (per curiam);
supra, at 6–7. That omission apparently resulted from the Government’s
litigation choices. Only in the Seventh Circuit—not in the Fifth—did the
Government press the narrower theory and submit supporting evidence
about the Treasury’s deposit of moneys into the Fund. Had the Fifth
Circuit seen the same evidence, it may well have responded as the Sev-
enth did. Indeed, its own analysis suggests as much. For under the Fifth
Circuit’s approach, the definition of “claim” is met “when United States
Treasury dollars flow to the defrauded [program].” Shupe, 759 F. 3d, at
10 WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                          Opinion of the Court

   Wisconsin Bell resists that conclusion, arguing that even
the $100 million was provided by, and only by, the carriers.
See, e.g., Brief for Wisconsin Bell 27 (“The E-rate program
is funded entirely by private carriers’ contributions”). On
that alternative view, the Government played no more than
an intermediary role: It “merely collected and held” the car-
riers’ required payments “pending their return” to “their
rightful owner, the Administrative Company.” Id., at 31.
And “facilitat[ing] the transfer of money,” Wisconsin Bell
says, does not amount to “provid[ing]” money. Id., at 30.
Rather, the deposits that the Treasury put into the Fund
“are no different than” the carriers’ “contributions them-
selves.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 5; see id., at 23. The former stand
in for the latter, and remain just as private.
   But to start with, Wisconsin Bell mischaracterizes the
Government’s role in bringing the $100 million to the Fund.
The Government was not a passive throughway for the
transmission of E-rate moneys from one private party (the
carrier) to another (the Administrative Company). Nor
were the Government’s activities confined to “facilitating”
such transfers, as Wisconsin Bell would have it. Take first
the $50 million in delinquent contributions, on which Wis-
consin Bell almost wholly focuses. The FCC and Treasury
Department extracted those moneys from carriers that,
even after the Administrative Company’s entreaties, re-
fused to pay on schedule. Without the agencies’ dunning,
the contributions would have come in yet later—or might
never have arrived. (And if no contributions, likely no in-
terest or penalties either.) Still less does the other $50 mil-
lion—from settlement and restitution awards—align with
——————
383; see ibid. (noting with approval that “courts have found that the Gov-
ernment ‘provides any portion’ of the money requested when the Govern-
ment has given [a program] even a drop of treasury money”); id., at 388
(concluding that the Government did not provide any of the requested
money because “there are no federal funds involved in the [E-Rate] pro-
gram”).
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                     Opinion of the Court

Wisconsin Bell’s story. Those awards came from the Justice
Department’s efforts to prosecute wrongdoing in the E-Rate
program. And the amounts obtained thus reflected not the
carriers’ regular contributions but the harms that fraudu-
lent conduct had imposed on the Fund and its beneficiaries.
So the Government, in forwarding those payments to the
Fund, did not serve as a program middleman or facilitator.
Rather, the Government itself generated the moneys it pro-
vided.
   And anyway, a simple intermediary can sometimes also
“provide” things to a recipient—and the Government, even
if viewed only in that light, would do so here. Wisconsin
Bell assumes that only one entity can provide a thing, so
that if a carrier gave a contribution to the Government to
give to the Fund, then the carrier alone provided the money.
But why not say that both did so—the originator of the
money and the transmitter alike? Consider a perhaps
dated example used at oral argument. See id., at 13–14. A
proctor for an exam gives out blue books and pencils to stu-
dents. She has not purchased them herself; rather, she has
gotten them from the school. It would still be natural to say
that she (along with the school) has “provided”—has sup-
plied, furnished, or made available—the booklets and pen-
cils. Similar real-world examples abound. A bank teller
“provides” an account holder with money, even though the
recipient’s employer deposited the relevant funds. A UPS
driver “provides” a person with a package, even though the
driver first picked up the box from a department store. In
each case, not only the original source but also the middle-
man (the intermediary, transmitter, facilitator, what have
you) provides the thing at issue. And the same is true here.
Supposing that carriers “provided” the relevant $100 mil-
lion to the Fund, so too did the Government by collecting it
and routing it through Treasury accounts.
   Nothing about the ownership of the $100 million while in
12 WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                          Opinion of the Court

the Treasury matters to that conclusion, in the way Wiscon-
sin Bell at times suggests. In its view, those moneys were
first owned by private carriers and then owned by the pri-
vate Administrative Company—but not owned by the Gov-
ernment in the interim period when it had “temporary pos-
session.” Id., at 22. Perhaps. Or perhaps not—the
Government (as well as Heath) takes the opposite view. See
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 21–22. The im-
portant point here is that the answer is irrelevant. Con-
sider the examples just given: No one would say that the
proctor or the teller or the UPS driver does not “provide”
(again, supply, furnish, or make available) the relevant
item just because she does not own it while making the
transfer. And so too here. Were there any doubt, another
aspect of the FCA’s definition of the term “claim” clears it
away. Recall that the definition—including its provides-
the-money requirement—can be met “whether or not the
United States has title to the money” at issue.
§3729(b)(2)(A); see supra, at 5.6 So as the FCA sees the
matter, the technical ownership of the $100 million that the
Government conveyed to the Fund makes not a whit of dif-
ference. Either way, its transfers can form the basis of an
FCA suit.
   Those transfers, indeed, look like most Government
spending—neither more nor less private, neither more nor
less public. Money usually comes to the Government from
private parties—through taxes, fines, or fees of all kinds.
And then money usually goes out to the broader commu-
nity, to fund any number of programs and activities. Be-
tween the time money comes in and the time money goes
out, it sits—as the $100 million here did—in Treasury ac-

——————
  6 As noted earlier, we assume without deciding that this provision, en-

acted in 2009, merely clarified existing law, and thus that the view it
takes is relevant to the pre-2009, as well as the post-2009, claims in this
case. See supra, at 5, n. 3.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)          13

                     Opinion of the Court

counts. In this broad array of schemes, the funding re-
ceived may be more or less earmarked, and it may be dis-
bursed more or less quickly. But the basic mechanism re-
mains the same. Money enters and then exits the public
fisc; the Government collects money and then furnishes it
for some use. And so it was here, in the years relevant to
Heath’s FCA suit. The Government obtained $100 million
in delinquent contributions, settlement awards, and resti-
tution payments related to the E-Rate program. It held
that money for a time in the U. S. Treasury. And then it
supplied that money to reimburse program participants—
“provid[ing],” as the FCA requires, a “portion of the money”
requested for schools’ E-Rate subsidies.
                              III
   What we have said above is enough to enable Heath’s
FCA suit to proceed. The reimbursement requests at issue
qualify as “claims” under the FCA because, in the years
they were made, the Government deposited money into the
Fund to pay for E-Rate subsidies. And all the statute re-
quires is that those deposits provide “any portion”—not the
whole—of the sums requested. For that reason, we need
not address the alternative theory that the Government
provides all E-Rate funds by exercising regulatory control
over the program. Whether or not that is so, Heath can
press his claim that, by violating the “lowest corresponding
price” rule, Wisconsin Bell “knowingly present[ed], or
cause[d] to be presented,” a set of “false or fraudulent
claim[s] for payment.” §3729(a)(1)(A).
   If Heath prevails on the merits, issues about damages
may well emerge. At oral argument, the parties forecast
their differences on those issues—including about whether
(and, if so, how) the amount of money the Government de-
posited should limit the damages Heath can recover. See,
e.g., Tr. of Oral Arg. 24–26, 29–32, 53–54, 66–68, 93–94.
But those issues were not briefed in this Court, and in any
14 WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    Opinion of the Court

event are a long way away. We therefore leave them for the
courts below to decide, should it ever become necessary to
do so.
  For the reasons stated, we affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeals and remand the case for further proceed-
ings consistent with this opinion.

                                           It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)              1

                     THOMAS, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                          No. 23–1127
                          _________________


  WISCONSIN BELL, INC., PETITIONER v. UNITED
         STATES, EX REL. TODD HEATH
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
                       [February 21, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE KAVANAUGH joins,
and with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins as to Part I, concur-
ring.
   I join the Court’s opinion in full because it correctly holds
that, for purposes of the False Claims Act (FCA), the Fed-
eral Government “provides” money to the Education Rate
(E-Rate) program when the Government itself collects over-
due contributions, interest, penalties, settlements, and res-
titution payments, and then transfers that money from
U. S. Treasury accounts into the E-Rate program. See 31
U. S. C. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I). The Court saves for another
day two more difficult questions: First, whether the Gov-
ernment “provides” the money that it requires private car-
riers to contribute to the E-Rate program, see ibid.; and sec-
ond, whether the E-Rate program’s administrator is an
agent of the United States. I express no definitive views on
those questions today. I write separately only to highlight
that the Government’s positions on these questions might,
if accepted, have significant implications for both the scope
of the FCA and the lawfulness of the E-Rate program.
                           I
   The question presented in this case is whether reim-
bursement requests submitted to the E-Rate program are
“claims” under the FCA. See §3729(b)(2). As the Court’s
2   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                         THOMAS, J., concurring

opinion explains, ante, at 4–5, the definition of “claim” de-
pends on the person or entity to whom the request for
money is made. If the request is made to a federal officer,
employee, or agent, then any request for money qualifies as
a “claim.” §3729(b)(2)(A)(i). But, if the request is made to
some “other recipient,” then the request is a “claim” only in
limited circumstances, such as if the Federal Government
“provides or has provided any portion of the money” re-
quested and the money is to be spent or used “to advance a
Government program or interest.” §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii).
   All agree that E-Rate reimbursement requests are made
to the Universal Service Administrative Company (Admin-
istrative Company). The Administrative Company is a pri-
vate not-for-profit corporation whose parent entity, the Na-
tional Exchange Carrier Association (Carrier Association),
is another private not-for-profit corporation. See 47 CFR
§§54.5, 69.602 (2023).
   The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has
“appointed” the Administrative Company as “Administra-
tor” of the Universal Service Fund (Fund). See §54.701(a).
The Fund is composed primarily of money from private tel-
ecommunications carriers. It is undisputed that a federal
statute requires certain carriers to contribute “to the spe-
cific, predictable, and sufficient mechanisms established by
the [FCC] to preserve and advance universal service.” See
47 U. S. C. §254(d). FCC regulations in turn mandate that
certain carriers contribute to the Fund on a quarterly basis.
47 CFR §§54.706(a)–(b), 54.709(a). FCC regulations also
task the Administrative Company with disbursing the
money in the Fund to beneficiaries of the E-Rate program
and other universal service initiatives. §54.702(b).*
   The Government offered us three different paths to find-
ing that an E-Rate reimbursement request satisfies the
——————
  *As the Court’s opinion explains, see ante, at 3, n. 1, the nature of the
relationship between the FCC and the Administrative Company is the
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                3

                         THOMAS, J., concurring

FCA’s definition of “claim.” First, assuming that the Ad-
ministrative Company is an “other recipient,” the Govern-
ment argued that the Government provides all the money
in the Fund because federal law requires private carriers to
contribute to it. Second, the Government contended that
even if it does not provide all the money, it provided at least
a “ ‘portion’ ” of it during the years relevant to this case be-
cause “the [FCC], the Department of the Treasury, and the
Department of Justice collected more than $100 million in
contributions, interest, and penalties from delinquent car-
riers; held the money in Treasury accounts; and then depos-
ited the money in the Fund.” Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 7–8. Third, the Government argued that
even if it does not provide any money to the Fund, an E-
Rate reimbursement request is a “claim” under the FCA be-
cause the Administrative Company—the entity to whom a
request for money is made—is an “agent of the United
States.” §3729(b)(2)(A)(i).
   The Court resolves this case on the second ground alone.
During the years relevant here, the Treasury Department
deposited more than $100 million directly into the Fund. Of
that sum, approximately $50 million came from delinquent
contributions and related interest and penalties, and the
other $50 million came from settlements and restitution
awards obtained by the Justice Department. I understand
the Court to have decided that on the facts of this case—
where the Government itself exercised its power to collect
overdue contributions, interest, penalties, settlements, and
restitution awards, and then transferred those funds from
U. S. Treasury accounts into the Fund—the Government
“provided” money within the meaning of the FCA.
§3729(b)(2)(A)(ii).
   I do not understand the Court to have opined on any other

——————
subject of ongoing litigation. I express no view on that matter.
4   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

set of facts. The opinion explains that, in making the trans-
fers at issue here, the Government “was not a passive
throughway.” Ante, at 10. Rather, the FCC and the Treas-
ury Department used the power of the Government to “ex-
trac[t]” money from private carriers. Ibid. The Justice De-
partment, for its part, “prosecute[d] wrongdoing,” and then
obtained settlements and restitution awards. Ibid. The
Court observes that, “[w]ithout the agencies’ dunning,” the
money the Government collected would have come later “or
might never have arrived.” Ibid. Thus, that “the Govern-
ment itself generated the moneys it provided” is an essen-
tial component of our decision. Ante, at 11. I do not under-
stand us to have resolved whether the Government would
have “provided” money in the relevant sense,
§3729(b)(2)(A)(ii), if it had acted as a “passive throughway”
or a mere “transmitter” or “facilitator,” ante, at 10–11. I
agree with the Court’s resolution of the narrow question be-
fore us, and I am pleased to join in full. The remainder of
this opinion considers issues that the Court does not reach.
                               II
                               A
  The Government’s leading theory in this case was that
the FCA applies to E-Rate reimbursement requests because
the Government provides all the money in the Fund. Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 12–16; Tr. of Oral Arg.
85 (asserting that the United States would “prefer to win
on th[is] ground”). It is undisputed that federal law and the
FCC’s implementing regulations require private telecom-
munications carriers to contribute on a quarterly basis to
the Fund. See 47 U. S. C. §254(d); 47 CFR §§54.706(a)–(b),
54.709(a). According to the Government, because a federal
statute compels these contributions, the Government “pro-
vides” all the money that private carriers pay. 31 U. S. C.
§3729(b)(2)(A)(ii).
  Two Courts of Appeals have considered this argument.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                     THOMAS, J., concurring

The Seventh Circuit agreed with the Government in the de-
cision below. It observed that, in deciding whether the FCA
applies to alleged fraud aimed at a particular entity, “courts
have asked whether there is a ‘sufficiently close nexus’ be-
tween the defrauded entity or program and the federal gov-
ernment ‘such that a loss to the former is effectively a loss
to the latter.’ ” 92 F. 4th 654, 669 (2024). The court con-
cluded that the “high degree of government involvement in
the E-Rate program demonstrates that such a nexus exists
here.” Ibid.
   The Fifth Circuit reached the opposite conclusion, hold-
ing that the Government’s “broad view” is “unsupported by
the cases interpreting the FCA.” United States ex rel.
Shupe v. Cisco Systems, Inc., 759 F. 3d 379, 383 (2014). The
Fifth Circuit explained that courts have traditionally “lim-
ited the FCA’s application to instances of fraud that might
result in financial loss to the Government.” Id., at 385 (in-
ternal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added). And, it
observed that courts have declined to extend the FCA’s pro-
tections to programs that “do not receive federal funds” and
“have too tenuous of a relationship to the Government to be
considered a Government entity.” Id., at 384. While ac-
knowledging that “the FCC retains some oversight and reg-
ulation” over the Administrative Company, the Fifth Cir-
cuit nevertheless concluded that the FCA’s protections do
not apply to E-Rate reimbursement requests because the
Administrative Company is “a private corporation owned
by an industry trade group.” Id., at 387.
   Critically, both the Fifth and Seventh Circuits recognized
that courts have traditionally interpreted the FCA to cover
fraud against only those defrauded entities that receive fed-
eral funding or operate with a “high degree of government
involvement.” 92 F. 4th, at 669; see also 759 F. 3d, at 383–
385. The courts disagreed about whether the relationship
between the Administrative Company and the Federal Gov-
ernment is sufficiently close. But, neither court posited
6   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

that the FCA covers fraud against private entities that lack
both federal funding and a “sufficiently close nexus” with
the Federal Government. 92 F. 4th, at 669 (internal quota-
tion marks omitted).
   This Court’s case law strongly suggests that the FCA
does not cover fraud against purely private entities with
purely private funding sources. We have always assumed
that the FCA does not cover acts directed toward parties
that are not “the Government.” Allison Engine Co. v.
United States ex rel. Sanders, 553 U. S. 662, 669–670
(2008). We have said that the purpose of the FCA was “to
provide for restitution to the government of money taken
from it by fraud.” United States ex rel. Marcus v. Hess, 317
U. S. 537, 551 (1943). And, we have repeatedly remarked
that the FCA exists to “ ‘protect the funds and property of
the Government.’ ” United States ex rel. Polansky v. Execu-
tive Health Resources, Inc., 599 U. S. 419, 424 (2023) (quot-
ing Rainwater v. United States, 356 U. S. 590, 592 (1958);
emphasis added); see also United States v. McNinch, 356
U. S. 595, 599 (1958) (explaining that Congress enacted the
FCA because it “wanted to stop th[e] plundering of the pub-
lic treasury”); United States v. Neifert-White Co., 390 U. S.
228, 233 (1968) (explaining that a prior version of the FCA
extended to “all fraudulent attempts to cause the Govern-
ment to pay out sums of money” (emphasis added)).
   Relying on this understanding of the scope of the FCA,
lower courts have determined that a program does not re-
ceive FCA protections unless it receives money that belongs
to the Government or the Government controls the pro-
gram. For example, the Eighth Circuit held that false pay-
ment requests submitted to a private trust fund created to
finance a CERCLA Superfund cleanup project did not qual-
ify as “claims” under the FCA. Costner v. URS Consultants,
Inc., 153 F. 3d 667, 677 (1998). While recognizing that the
funds might not have existed if the Government had not
helped negotiate the trust fund’s creation, the court still
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

held that the Government did not “provide” the funds be-
cause none of the funds came from the Treasury, the Gov-
ernment did not have access to the trust fund, and the Gov-
ernment did not control the trust fund’s disbursement.
Ibid. Similarly, the Third Circuit refused to apply the FCA
to fraudulent legal bills submitted for approval to a United
States Bankruptcy Court because the Government itself
would not suffer any financial loss. Hutchins v. Wilentz,
Goldman & Spitzer, 253 F. 3d 176, 182–184 (2001). The
court explained that “the submission of false claims to the
United States government for approval which do not or
would not cause financial loss to the government are not
within the purview of the False Claims Act.” Id., at 184.
The Fifth Circuit identified several other examples of courts
interpreting the FCA in a similar way. See Shupe, 759
F. 3d, at 384–385 (collecting cases).
   In this case, the Government paid scant attention to the
fact that courts historically have not applied the FCA to
cover fraud on nongovernment entities unless the Govern-
ment itself will face a financial loss. Assuming that ap-
proach is correct, it is not obvious to me that the Govern-
ment puts its own funds at risk when it requires private
parties to fund the E-Rate program. Ordinary E-Rate con-
tributions come from private carriers. And, if the carrier
contributions are insufficient to fund the E-Rate program,
the Administrative Company must turn to private sources
of credit—not the Federal Government—to remedy any
budgetary shortfall. See 47 CFR §54.709(c). It is difficult
for me to see how the loss of ordinary contributions from
carriers is necessarily a loss to the Government.
   The political branches chose to separate the program
from the public fisc. That choice was made in part to pre-
vent the E-Rate program from being “turned into a piggy
bank which can be raided” “for budgetary gains.” 143 Cong.
Rec. 16054 (1997) (statement of Sen. Kerrey); accord, ibid.
(statement of Sen. Daschle). Whatever the merits of that
8   WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

choice, I suspect it might carry consequences for the ap-
plicability of the FCA.
                               B
   Before we accept the Government’s theory that the FCA
applies so long as the Government requires one private
party to pay another private party, we ought to grapple
with that argument’s implications. If the Government’s po-
sition is correct, then the FCA would seem to cover a wide
range of matters until now understood to be outside the
scope of the statute. Consider a few examples.
   Federal law authorizes States to withhold federal pay
and retirement benefits “to enforce the legal obligation of
the individual to provide child support.” 42 U. S. C.
§659(a). This law therefore facilitates a payment from one
private party to another. If this Court were to accept that
such a law is all it takes for the Government to “provid[e]”
money under the FCA, then the FCA would seem to cover
false or fraudulent claims made against a recipient of child-
support payments because a request for money is made to
an “other recipient,” and the money is spent or used to ad-
vance a Government “interest.” 31 U. S. C. §3729(b)(2)
(A)(ii). But, applying the FCA in this context would signif-
icantly expand the reach of the statute.
   Or, consider a civil judgment for money damages entered
by a federal court. The entry of such a judgment has the
effect of requiring a private party to pay a sum of money to
another private party. If this Court were to hold that the
Government “provides” money for FCA purposes so long as
the Federal Government requires a person to pay a sum of
money to someone else, then it seems possible that the FCA
might cover at least some false or fraudulent requests for
money made to a recipient of money damages. The request
would be made to an “other recipient” and, at least in some
instances, money damages might be spent or used “to ad-
vance a Government . . . interest.” §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii).
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           9

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

  Another example is the individual mandate component of
the Affordable Care Act, 124 Stat. 119. That provision re-
quires individuals to purchase “minimum essential” health
insurance coverage. 26 U. S. C. §5000A(a). If we were to
accept the Government’s broad theory of what it means to
provide money for purposes of the FCA, I am not sure why
the FCA would not cover at least some false or fraudulent
requests for money made to private health insurance com-
panies whose customers purchased health insurance be-
cause of the individual mandate. A health insurance com-
pany appears to be an “other recipient,” and it is at least
plausible that the money health insurers spend on medical
care “advance[s] a Government program or interest.” 31
U. S. C. §3729(b)(2)(A)(ii).
  Perhaps the Government can explain why the FCA
sweeps far broader than has been traditionally understood.
Or, perhaps there are meaningful ways to differentiate
these examples or other reasons why the FCA would not
apply even if this Court accepted the Government’s broad
theory of what it means to “provide” money under the FCA.
But, the Government has not engaged with or appreciated
the drastic consequences that might follow if this Court
were to accept its primary argument.
  I express no definitive view on the merits of the Govern-
ment’s broad theory. I simply note that if this question re-
turns to us, we ought to carefully consider what the Gov-
ernment’s theory might mean for the scope of the FCA.
                             III
   The Government offered this Court another avenue to
finding that the FCA applies to E-Rate reimbursement re-
quests. It argued that any request for money made to the
Administrative Company qualifies as a “claim” because the
Administrative Company is an “agent of the United States.”
§3729(b)(2)(A)(i). But, if the Government is correct, then
10 WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

the E-Rate program would seem to run afoul of the Govern-
ment Corporation Control Act (GCCA), 59 Stat. 597.
   The GCCA provides that “[a]n agency may establish or
acquire a corporation to act as an agency only by or under
a law of the United States specifically authorizing the ac-
tion.” 31 U. S. C. §9102. In other words, the statute “pro-
hibit[s] [the] creation of new Government corporations
without specific congressional authorization.” Lebron v.
National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S. 374,
390 (1995).
   The FCC should be familiar with the GCCA. In the Tel-
ecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 56, Congress di-
rected the FCC to establish a set of universal service pro-
grams. See 47 U. S. C. §254. In its first attempt at carrying
out that statutory command, the FCC instructed the Car-
rier Association to create the Administrative Company as
an “independently functioning not-for-profit subsidiary”
that would “assure significant industry-wide representa-
tion in the administration” of universal service programs.
In re Changes to Bd. of Directors of Nat. Exchange Carrier
Assn., Inc., 12 FCC Rcd. 18400, 18401, 18415 (1997) (em-
phasis added). The FCC also directed the Carrier Associa-
tion to create two freestanding corporations to manage the
E-Rate program and another universal service initiative.
Id., at 18430–18431.
   Shortly thereafter, a group of Senators inquired whether
the FCC had exceeded its authority when it directed the
Carrier Association to create private corporations. In re-
sponse to these inquiries, the General Accounting Office
(GAO), known today as the Government Accountability Of-
fice, conducted an investigation. The GAO did not object to
the FCC’s use of the Carrier Association as “a neutral third-
party administrator.” GAO, Testimony Before the Subcom-
mittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Pro-
tection, Committee on Commerce, House of Representa-
tives, TELECOMMUNICATIONS: FCC Lacked Authority
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            11

                     THOMAS, J., concurring

To Create Corporations To Administer Universal Service
Programs 2 (GAO/T–RCED/OGC–98–84, 1998). Nor did it
object to the FCC’s instruction to create the Administrative
Company—the “independently functioning, not-for-profit
subsidiary” of the Carrier Association. 12 FCC Rcd., at
18415; see GAO Testimony, at 18–20. But, the GAO did
object to the FCC’s attempt to create government corpora-
tions. Id., at 13. The GAO determined that the FCC had
violated the GCCA by attempting to establish freestanding
corporations to manage certain universal service programs
and “act as its agents in carrying out functions assigned by
statute to the [FCC].” Ibid. In light of this report, Congress
instructed the FCC to “propose a new structure for the
implementation       of    universal    service      programs.”
H. R. Conf. Rep. No. 105–504, p. 87 (1998).
   The FCC responded by asking Congress for “specific stat-
utory authority . . . to create or designate, . . . one or more
entities, such as the Universal Service Administrative
Company, to administer the federal universal service sup-
port mechanisms.” Report in Response to Senate Bill 1768
and Conference Report on H. R. 3579, 13 FCC Rcd. 11810,
11819 (1998). But, Congress refused the agency’s request.
   Congress’s choice left the FCC with the “independently
functioning” Administrative Company, 12 FCC Rcd., at
18415, but no government corporations to “act as its
agents,” GAO Testimony, at 13. The FCC published a final
rule appointing the Administrative Company as the perma-
nent administrator of the Universal Service programs. See
Final Rule, Changes to the Board of Directors of the Na-
tional Exchange Carrier Association, Inc., Federal-State
Joint Board on Universal Service, 63 Fed. Reg. 70564–
70565, 70572–70573 (1998) (codified, as amended, at 47
CFR §54.701).
   The upshot is that the Administrative Company was orig-
inally understood to be—and the lawfulness of the E-Rate
program turned upon the Administrative Company being—
12 WISCONSIN BELL, INC. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. HEATH

                    THOMAS, J., concurring

an independent, nongovernment entity. To this day, Con-
gress has never passed a law approving the Administrative
Company as a government corporation, nor has it author-
ized the FCC to formally label the Administrative Company
a subagency. The Government nevertheless contends be-
fore this Court that the Administrative Company is now an
agent of the United States.
   Whether the Administrative Company is in fact an agent
of the United States is a complex question that we do not
resolve today. That determination appears to turn on the
kind and degree of control that the FCC exercises over the
Administrative Company. And, those issues are the subject
of another case that this Court will consider soon. See Con-
sumers’ Research v. FCC, 109 F. 4th 743 (CA5) (en banc),
cert. granted, 604 U. S. ___ (2024). I express no view on
whether the Government’s agency argument is correct. I
simply note that if the Government is correct, then it will
need to explain how the E-Rate program’s current structure
is compatible with the GCCA. The Government relied on
the independent, nongovernmental nature of the Adminis-
trative Company to establish compliance with the GCCA.
Now, the Government asserts that the Administrative
Company is essentially an arm of the FCC. I doubt that the
Government can have it both ways.
                              IV
   The Court resolves this case on a narrow, fact-specific
ground. In a future case, however, we may need to confront
the Government’s other arguments—namely, that the FCA
applies to funds that private parties pay to other private
parties, and that the Administrative Company is an agent
of the United States. If these issues return to us, I hope we
will carefully consider their consequences.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           1

                  KAVANAUGH, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                         No. 23–1127
                         _________________


  WISCONSIN BELL, INC., PETITIONER v. UNITED
         STATES, EX REL. TODD HEATH
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
                     [February 21, 2025]

  JUSTICE KAVANAUGH, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
concurring.
  I join the Court’s opinion, which decides a narrow
statutory question regarding the scope of the False Claims
Act. That statutory issue arises in the context of a qui tam
suit.   The Act’s qui tam provisions raise substantial
constitutional questions under Article II. See, e.g., United
States ex rel. Polansky v. Executive Health Resources, Inc.,
599 U. S. 419, 442 (2023) (KAVANAUGH, J., concurring); id.,
at 449–452 (THOMAS, J., dissenting). Those constitutional
questions are not before the Court in this case. But in an
appropriate case, the Court should consider the competing
arguments on the Article II issue.