(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
    CALIFORNIA v. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                     AGENCY

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                  THE NINTH CIRCUIT

     No. 23–753.      Argued October 16, 2024—Decided March 4, 2025
Under the Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U. S. C. §1151 et seq., the Envi-
 ronmental Protection Agency (EPA) and authorized state agencies is-
 sue permits that impose requirements on entities that wish to dis-
 charge “pollutants” into the waters of the United States. A critical
 component of the CWA regulatory scheme is the National Pollutant
 Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), which makes it unlawful to
 discharge pollutants into covered bodies of water unless authorized by
 permit. EPA v. California ex rel. State Water Resources Control Bd.,
 426 U. S. 200, 205. These permits typically include “effluent limita-
 tions” on discharges that restrict the “quantities, rates, and concentra-
 tions of chemical, physical, biological, and other constituents.”
 §1362(11). Failure to comply with permit limitations exposes permit-
 tees to civil penalties and even criminal prosecution. §§1319(c) and
 (d). Under what is known as the “permit shield” provision, however,
 an entity that adheres to the terms of its permit is deemed to be com-
 pliant with the Act. §1342(k).
    This case involves a challenge to “end-result” requirements—permit
 provisions that do not spell out what a permittee must do or refrain
 from doing but instead make a permittee responsible for the quality of
 the water in the body of water into which the permittee discharges
 pollutants. The City of San Francisco operates two combined
 wastewater treatment facilities that process both wastewater and
 stormwater. Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) Control Policy, 59 Fed.
 Reg. 18689; 75 F. 4th 1074, 1082 (CA9). During periods of heavy pre-
 cipitation, the combination of wastewater and stormwater may exceed
 the facility’s capacity, and the result may be the discharge of untreated
2           CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                                  Syllabus

    water, including raw sewage, into the Pacific Ocean or the San Fran-
    cisco Bay. 59 Fed. Reg. 18689; EPA, Office of Water, Combined Sewer
    Overflows: Guidance for Permit Writers, p. 1–1; 75 F. 4th, at 1082–
    1083. In 1994, the EPA adopted its CSO Control Policy, which requires
    municipalities with combined systems to take prescribed measures
    and to develop and implement a Long-Term Control Plan, and provides
    for a two-phase permitting process. 59 Fed. Reg. 18691, 18696.
       For many years, San Francisco’s NPDES permit for its Oceanside
    facility was renewed without controversy, but in 2019, the EPA issued
    a renewal permit that added two end-result requirements. 75 F. 4th,
    at 1084–1085. The first of these prohibits the facility from making any
    discharge that “contribute[s] to a violation of any applicable water
    quality standard” for receiving waters. Id., at 1085. The second pro-
    vides that the City cannot perform any treatment or make any dis-
    charge that “create[s] pollution, contamination, or nuisance as defined
    by California Water Code section 13050.” Ibid. (internal quotation
    marks omitted). San Francisco argued that the end-result require-
    ments exceed EPA’s statutory authority, but the Ninth Circuit denied
    the city’s petition for review. The court held that §1311(b)(1)(C) au-
    thorizes EPA to impose “any” limitations ensuring applicable water
    quality standards are satisfied in a receiving body of water.
Held: Section 1311(b)(1)(C) does not authorize the EPA to include “end-
 result” provisions in NPDES permits. Determining what steps a per-
 mittee must take to ensure that water quality standards are met is the
 EPA’s responsibility, and Congress has given it the tools needed to
 make that determination. Pp. 7–19.
    (a) Not all “limitations” under §1311 must qualify as effluent limita-
 tions. While §§1311(b)(1)(A) and (B) refer to “effluent limitations,”
 §1311(b)(1)(C) refers to “any more stringent limitation.” This distinc-
 tion shows that Congress intentionally authorized limitations beyond
 effluent limitations because “it is generally presumed that Congress
 acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclu-
 sion” of language in a statute. Russello v. United States, 464 U. S. 16,
 23 (internal quotation marks omitted). Other CWA provisions support
 this by referring to “effluent limitations and other limitations” under
 §1311. See, e.g., §§1341(d), 1365(f). Moreover, San Francisco’s inter-
 pretation would either invalidate widely accepted narrative permit
 provisions or require an improbably broad reading of “effluent limita-
 tion.” Pp. 7–9.
    (b) Section 1311(b)(1)(C) does not authorize permit requirements
 conditioning compliance on receiving water quality. The provision’s
 text, structure, and context support this interpretation. Pp. 9–19.
       (1) The terms “limitation,” “implement,” and “meet” in
 §1311(b)(1)(C) suggest EPA must set specific rules permittees must
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      3

                                 Syllabus

  follow to achieve water quality goals. A “limitation” is a “restriction
  . . . imposed from without,” not an end-result requirement leaving per-
  mittees to determine necessary steps. Webster’s Third New Interna-
  tional Dictionary 1312. When a provision tells a permittee that a par-
  ticular end result must be achieved, the direct source of the restriction
  comes from within, not “from without.” To “implement” standards re-
  quires “concrete measures,” not simply mandating achievement of re-
  sults. Id., at 1134; §1311(b)(1)(C). A limitation that is “necessary to
  meet” an objective is most naturally understood to mean a provision
  that sets out actions that must be taken to achieve the objective. Pp.
  10–12.
         (2) The pre-1972 Water Pollution Control Act (WPCA) contained
  a provision that allowed direct enforcement against a polluter if the
  quality of the water into which the polluter discharges pollutants
  failed to meet water quality standards. See Federal Water Pollution
  Control Act, ch. 758, §§1, 2(d)(1), 2(d)(4), 2(d)(7), 62 Stat. 1155, 1156–
  1157. But Congress deliberately omitted such provisions when over-
  hauling the law in 1972. Instead, the CWA imposes “direct re-
  strictions” on polluters rather than working backward from pollution
  to assign responsibility. EPA, 426 U. S., at 204. The Government’s
  interpretation would undo what Congress plainly sought to achieve
  when it scrapped the WPCA’s backward-looking approach. Pp. 12–14.
         (3) Two features of the broader statutory scheme further support
  this conclusion. First, end-result requirements would negate the
  CWA’s “permit shield” protecting compliant permittees from liability.
  Second, EPA’s interpretation provides no mechanism for fairly allocat-
  ing responsibility among multiple dischargers contributing to water
  quality violations. Pp. 14–16.
      (c) The agency has adequate tools to obtain needed information from
  permittees without resorting to end-result requirements. Its reliance
  on the Combined Sewer Overflow Policy is misplaced as that policy
  authorizes narrative limitations but not end-result requirements. And
  concerns about disrupting general permits are unfounded given that
  narrative limitations remain available. Pp. 17–19.
75 F. 4th 1074, reversed and remanded.

  ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and THOMAS and KAVANAUGH, JJ., joined, in which GORSUCH, J., joined
as to all but Part II, and in which SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, BARRETT, and
JACKSON, JJ., joined as to Part II. BARRETT, J., filed an opinion dissent-
ing in part, in which SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, and JACKSON, JJ., joined.
                         Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                              Opinion of the Court

      NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
      United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
      Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
      pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                    _________________

                                    No. 23–753
                                    _________________


         CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
         CALIFORNIA, PETITIONER v. ENVIRON-
            MENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
                                  [March 4, 2025]

   JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
   Under the Clean Water Act (CWA), 86 Stat. 816, 33
U. S. C. §1251 et seq., the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and authorized state agencies1 may issue permits
that impose requirements on entities that wish to discharge
“pollutants” (a broadly defined term) 2 into the waters of the
United States.3 Permits issued by these agencies include
what the CWA calls “effluent limitations,” that is, provi-
sions that specify the quantities of enumerated pollutants
that may be discharged.4 It is also common for permits to
set out other steps that a discharger must take. These may
include testing, record-keeping, and reporting require-
ments, as well as requirements obligating a permittee to
follow specified practices designed to reduce pollution.

——————
  1 See 33 U. S. C. §1342(b).     The provision at issue in this case,
§1311(b)(1)(C), applies equally to federal and state permits, but for con-
venience, we refer only to the EPA when referring to the scope of permit-
ting authority under that provision.
  2 §1362(6).
  3 §1362(7).
  4 §1362(11).
2        CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                        Opinion of the Court

None of these so-called narrative requirements is at issue
here.
   Instead, this case involves provisions that do not spell out
what a permittee must do or refrain from doing; rather,
they make a permittee responsible for the quality of the wa-
ter in the body of water into which the permittee discharges
pollutants. When a permit contains such requirements, a
permittee that punctiliously follows every specific require-
ment in its permit may nevertheless face crushing penalties
if the quality of the water in its receiving waters falls below
the applicable standards. For convenience, we will call such
provisions “end-result” requirements.
   The permittee in this case is a wastewater treatment fa-
cility owned by San Francisco. For the past five years, the
facility’s permit has included two end-result requirements,
and if those provisions are upheld, the City could be heavily
penalized even though it was never put on notice that it was
obligated to take any specific step other than those it un-
dertook. San Francisco argues that the end-result provi-
sions in its permit are not authorized by the CWA, and its
position is supported by many other similarly situated cit-
ies, including New York, the District of Columbia, Boston,
and Buffalo, as well as national and state associations
whose members collectively “provide wastewater and
stormwater services to the majority of [the people in this
country whose homes are connected to sewers].” 5
   We hold that the two challenged provisions exceed the
EPA’s authority. The text and structure of the CWA, as
well as the history of federal water pollution legislation,
make this clear. And resorting to such requirements is not
necessary to protect water quality. The EPA may itself de-
termine what a facility should do to protect water quality,


——————
 5 Brief for Public Wastewater and Stormwater Agencies et al. as Amici

Curiae 2.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    3

                          Opinion of the Court

and the Agency has ample tools to obtain whatever infor-
mation it needs to make that determination. If the EPA
does its work, our holding should have no adverse effect on
water quality.
                                I
                                A
   To understand the issue before us, it is helpful to take a
brief look back at the history of federal water pollution leg-
islation. For most of the Nation’s history, the Federal Gov-
ernment played a secondary role in this field. See Sackett
v. EPA, 598 U. S. 651, 659 (2023). In 1948, however, Con-
gress passed the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(WPCA), ch. 758, 62 Stat. 1155, which represented a cau-
tious expansion of federal authority. K. Murchison, Learn-
ing From More Than Five-and-a-Half Decades of Federal
Water Pollution Control Legislation: Twenty Lessons for
the Future, 32 Env. Affairs L. Rev. 527, 530–531 (2005)
The WPCA reaffirmed the long-accepted principle that
“controlling water pollution” was primarily a state respon-
sibility, but it also declared that the pollution of certain in-
terstate waters had become “a public nuisance” and was
“subject to abatement in a suit” brought by the Attorney
General on behalf of the United States. §§1, 2(d)(1), 2(d)(4),
2(d)(7), 62 Stat. 1155–1157.
   Over the next 24 years, the WPCA was amended numer-
ous times,6 and the federal role gradually grew, but the
basic structure of federal enforcement actions remained the
same. The starting point was the identification of a body of
water with substandard water quality. After that, federal


——————
  6 See Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1956, Pub. L. 84–

660, 70 Stat. 498; Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1961, Pub. L. 87–88, 75 Stat. 204; Water Quality Act of 1965, Pub. L. 89–
234, 79 Stat. 903; Water Quality Improvement Act of 1970, Pub. L. 91–
224, 84 Stat. 91.
4         CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

authorities had to work backward and prove that a partic-
ular entity should be held responsible for the problem.7
Both the original version of the 1948 Act and all amend-
ments enacted before 1972 proved to be ineffective due in
part to this backward-looking model. See EPA v. California
ex rel. State Water Resources Control Bd., 426 U. S. 200, 202
(1976).
  By 1972, the WPCA’s inadequacy was apparent, and Con-
gress made a fresh start. It amended the WPCA by deleting
all its provisions and substituting what is now generally
known as the Clean Water Act. The CWA jettisoned the
WPCA’s retrospective approach and aimed directly at the
sources of pollution. A critical component of the CWA
scheme is the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES), see id., at 204–205, which makes it un-
lawful to discharge pollutants into covered bodies of water
unless authorized by permit. Permits issued under this
program may contain several different types of provisions.
  Some are known as “effluent limitations,” see 33 U. S. C.
§1311, which are defined as restrictions on the “quantities,
rates, and concentrations of chemical, physical, biological,
and other constituents.” §1362(11). Section 1311(b)(1),
subparagraphs (A) and (B) require compliance with one
type of effluent limitations: those that are based on what
can be achieved using specified pollution-treatment tech-
nologies. See 40 CFR §122.44(a)(1) (2023). In most cases,
these technology-based limitations are sufficient, but when
they are not, NPDES permits also include water quality-
based effluent limitations (WQBELs).             33 U. S. C.
§1311(b)(1)(C). These WQBELs, unlike technology-based
effluent limitations, are “set without regard to cost or tech-
nology availability.” Natural Resources Defense Council v.
EPA, 808 F. 3d 556, 565 (CA2 2015); see Natural Resources
——————
  7 See §2(d), 62 Stat. 1156–1157; 70 Stat. 504–505; 75 Stat. 208–209; 79

Stat. 909.
                    Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                  5

                        Opinion of the Court

Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 859 F. 2d 156, 208 (CADC
1988) (per curiam). Instead, they permit only those dis-
charges that may be made without unduly impairing water
quality.
   In addition to these effluent limitations, it is common for
permits to include requirements that do not set numerical
limitations on allowed discharges. One example, which is
apparently common in so-called general permits, is a provi-
sion demanding that permittees follow certain “best prac-
tices” that aim to limit pollution.8
   Under the NPDES system, permittees have a very strong
incentive to comply with all permit terms. For one thing,
the CWA gives the EPA a very big “stick.” Permittees that
do not comply may be hit with enormous civil penalties and
may face criminal prosecution for “knowing” or even “negli-
gent” violations. See §§1319(c) and (d); 40 CFR §19.4
(2023). At the same time, the CWA holds out an enticing
“carrot.” Under what is known as the “permit shield” pro-
vision, an entity that adheres to the terms of its permit is
deemed to be compliant with the Act. See 33 U. S. C.
§1342(k).
                              B
   The case now before us involves a particular type of pub-
lic wastewater treatment, one that processes both
wastewater (water that has been used in a home) and
stormwater (rainwater that does not sink into the ground).
Many major cities have such systems, and they present spe-
cial problems. During periods of heavy precipitation, the
combination of wastewater and stormwater may exceed the
facility’s treatment capacity, and the result may be the dis-
charge of untreated water, including raw sewage. See Com-
bined Sewer Overflow (CSO) Control Policy, 59 Fed. Reg.

——————
 8 See Brief for National Association of Home Builders et al. as Amici

Curiae 1, 11–12.
6        CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                        Opinion of the Court

18689 (1994); EPA, Office of Water, Combined Sewer Over-
flows: Guidance for Permit Writers, p. 1–1 (1995). This
problematic feature of combined facilities was recognized
long ago; installing a new system that handles stormwater
and wastewater separately is enormously expensive.9
   To address the problem of CSOs, the EPA adopted its
CSO Control Policy, which requires municipalities with
combined systems to take prescribed measures and to de-
velop and implement a Long-Term Control Plan. 59 Fed.
Reg. 18691. The CSO Policy provides for a two-phase per-
mitting process. Id., at 18696. During phase I, permits re-
quire municipalities to implement nine minimum controls
and to develop a long-term plan. Then, during phase II,
that plan must be implemented. Ibid. In 2000, Congress
amended the CWA and gave the CSO Control Policy the
force of a statute. See 33 U. S. C. §1342(q)(1).
                              C
   The city of San Francisco operates two combined treat-
ment facilities: the Bayside facility, which discharges into
San Francisco Bay, and the Oceanside facility, which emp-
ties into the Pacific Ocean. The permit at issue in this dis-
pute concerns only the Oceanside facility,10 which treats
water from 250 miles of sewers and serves approximately
250,000 residents. 75 F. 4th 1074, 1082 (CA9 2023).
   For many years, the Oceanside facility’s NPDES permit
was renewed without controversy, but in 2019, the two end-
result requirements that San Francisco now challenges
were added. Id., at 1084–1085. The first of these prohibits
the facility from making any discharge that “contribute[s]
to a violation of any applicable water quality standard” for
receiving waters. Id., at 1085. The second provides that

——————
   9 T. Camp, The Problem of Separation in Planning Sewer Systems, 38

J. Water Pollution Control Federation 1959 (1966).
   10 See App. to Pet. for Cert. 80–140.
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     7

                          Opinion of the Court

the City cannot perform any treatment or make any dis-
charge that “create[s] pollution, contamination, or nuisance
as defined by California Water Code section 13050.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted).
   The California Regional Water Quality Control Board for
the San Francisco Bay Region approved the final Oceanside
NPDES permit, and the EPA did the same.11 Id., at 1088.
San Francisco appealed to the EPA’s Environmental Ap-
peals Board (EAB), objecting to, among other things, the
two new provisions just noted. City and Cty. of San Fran-
cisco, 18 E. A. D. 322, 325 (2020). The EAB rejected San
Francisco’s challenge, and the City then filed a petition for
review in the Ninth Circuit under 33 U. S. C.
§1369(b)(1)(F). 75 F. 4th, at 1088. A divided Ninth Circuit
panel denied that petition, holding that §1311(b)(1)(C) au-
thorizes the EPA to impose “any” limitations that seek to
ensure that applicable water quality standards are satisfied
in a receiving body of water. Id., at 1089–1090. In dissent,
Judge Collins argued that the CWA “draws an explicit dis-
tinction between the ‘limitations’ that the agency must de-
vise and impose on a particular permittee’s discharges” and
the water quality standards themselves. Id., at 1102 (Col-
lins, J., dissenting). The majority, he maintained, erred by
making the “ ‘water quality standards’ themselves the ap-
plicable ‘limitation’ for an individual discharger.” Ibid.
   We granted certiorari to decide whether the EPA can im-
pose requirements like those at issue. 602 U. S. ___ (2024).
                                    II
  Contending     that   the     Ninth    Circuit  misread
§1311(b)(1)(C), San Francisco leads with the argument that

——————
  11 Both the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and the

EPA had to approve the NPDES permit because the Oceanside facility
discharges into waters that fall under both state and federal jurisdiction.
75 F. 4th 1074, 1082 (CA9 2023) (case below).
8       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                      Opinion of the Court

all “limitations” imposed under §1311 must qualify as efflu-
ent limitations. The statutory text dooms this broad argu-
ment. “[W]here Congress includes particular language in
one section of a statute but omits it in another section of the
same Act, it is generally presumed that Congress acts in-
tentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or ex-
clusion.” Russello v. United States, 464 U. S. 16, 23 (1983)
(internal quotation marks omitted). We have invoked this
canon time and time again. See, e.g., Gallardo v. Marstiller,
596 U. S. 420, 429–430 (2022); Salinas v. Railroad Retire-
ment Bd., 592 U. S. 188, 196 (2021); Azar v. Allina Health
Services, 587 U. S. 566, 576–577 (2019). And it is fatal to
San Francisco’s argument here. Sections 1311(b)(1)(A) and
(B) refer to “effluent limitations,” but the very next provi-
sion, §1311(b)(1)(C), refers instead to “any more stringent
limitation.” We cannot believe that Congress omitted the
term “effluent” from §1311(b)(1)(C) simply because it
wanted to save ink or assumed that regulators and inter-
ested parties would understand that the omission of the
term was inconsequential.
   Other provisions of the CWA support this conclusion by
describing §1311 as authorizing the EPA to impose effluent
or other limitations. See §1341(d) (referring to “effluent
limitations and other limitations, under section 1311”);
§1365(f ) (referring to “effluent limitation[s] or other limita-
tion[s] under section 1311”); §1367(d) (same); see also Na-
tional Assn. of Mfrs. v. Department of Defense, 583 U. S.
109, 122 (2018) (interpreting the phrase “effluent limitation
or other limitation” in the CWA’s judicial review provision,
§1369, to encompass both “effluent” limitations and limita-
tions such as “non-numerical operational practice[s]” and
“equipment specification[s]”).
   These reasons convince us that San Francisco’s argument
is wrong, but if more were needed, it is telling that the
City’s interpretation would lead to either drastic conse-
quences that the City is unwilling to embrace or a very loose
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)              9

                       Opinion of the Court

interpretation of the term “effluent limitation” that would
undermine the City’s argument. As noted earlier, it is com-
mon for permits to contain “narrative” provisions requiring
permittees to do such things as following certain “best prac-
tices.” These provisions do not directly restrict the “quan-
tities, rates, or concentration” of pollutants that a permittee
may discharge, and therefore they do not fit easily within
the definition of an “effluent limitation.” Nevertheless, the
City acknowledges their legitimacy, see Brief for Petitioner
15, 33, n. 22, and if that is correct, it must follow either that
(1) §1311(b)(1)(C) authorizes the imposition of limitations
other than effluent limitations (which would, of course, de-
feat the City’s argument) or (2) the statutory definition of
an effluent limitation should be read very loosely (which
raises the question why this broad interpretation would not
encompass the provisions at issue here). Under either al-
ternative, the City is on perilous ground.
   These problems overwhelm any help that the City can de-
rive from the fact that §1311 is titled “Effluent limitations.”
The title of a statutory provision can inform its interpreta-
tion, but it is not conclusive. See Dubin v. United States,
599 U. S. 110, 120–121 (2023). And here, the title of §1311
is not enough to win the day for the City. Section 1311 is a
lengthy provision, and most of its subsections concern efflu-
ent limitations. The title “Effluent limitations” provides a
rough description of the provision’s general sweep, but it
cannot be read as doing more than that.
                             III
   In addition to the broad argument discussed above, San
Francisco advances a narrower alternative, namely, that
even if §1311(b)(1)(C) is not limited to effluent limitations,
it “does not authorize EPA to impose NPDES permit re-
quirements that condition permitholders’ compliance on
whether receiving waters meet applicable water quality
10      CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                      Opinion of the Court

standards.” Brief for Petitioner 19. We agree with this ar-
gument. As the City maintains, “[t]he text, structure, and
pre- and post-enactment context” support this interpreta-
tion. Ibid.
                               A
   We begin with the text of §1311(b)(1)(C), which, as noted,
requires a permit to contain, in addition to “effluent limita-
tions,” “any more stringent limitation” that is “necessary to
meet” certain “water quality standards” that are imposed
under state law “or any other federal law or regulation”;
and “any more stringent limitation” that is “required to im-
plement any applicable water quality standard established
pursuant to this chapter.” (Emphasis added.) All the itali-
cized terms in the preceding sentence suggest that the most
natural reading of §1311(b)(1)(C) is that it authorizes the
EPA to set rules that a permittee must follow in order to
achieve a desired result, namely, a certain degree of water
quality.
   We start with the term “limitation.” As used in the rele-
vant context, a limitation is a “restriction or restraint im-
posed from without (as by law[)].” Webster’s Third New In-
ternational Dictionary 1312 (1976) (emphasis added). A
provision that tells a permittee that it must do certain spe-
cific things plainly qualifies as a limitation. Such a provi-
sion imposes a restriction “from without.” But when a pro-
vision simply tells a permittee that a particular end result
must be achieved and that it is up to the permittee to figure
out what it should do, the direct source of restriction or re-
straint is the plan that the permittee imposes on itself for
the purpose of avoiding future liability. In other words, the
direct source of the restriction comes from within, not “from
without.”
   We do not dispute that the term “limitation” is sometimes
used in a looser sense, but our task is to ascertain what the
term means in the specific context in question. And here,
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                      Opinion of the Court

our interpretation of the meaning of the term “limitation”
in §1311(b)(1)(C) must take into account the way in which
the term is used in the two preceding statutory subsections,
§§1311(b)(1)(A) and (B). In both those provisions, the “lim-
itations” are imposed directly by the EPA, and it is there-
fore natural to presume that the term has a similar mean-
ing in §1311(b)(1)(C). See, e.g., McDonnell v. United States,
579 U. S. 550, 568–569 (2016); Yates v. United States, 574
U. S. 528, 544 (2015) (plurality opinion); A. Scalia & B. Gar-
ner, Reading Law 195–198 (2012). So the use of the term
“limitation” in §§1311(b)(1)(A) and (B) provides an opening
clue that the EPA’s interpretation of §1311(b)(1)(C) may be
wrong.
   The terms “implement” and “meet” point in the same di-
rection. The implementation of an objective generally re-
fers to the taking of actions that are designed “to give prac-
tical effect to and ensure of actual fulfillment by concrete
measures.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary,
at 1134. Section 1311(b)(1)(C) tells the EPA to impose re-
quirements to “implement” water quality standards—that
is, to “ensure” “by concrete measures” that they are “ac-
tual[ly]” “fulfill[ed].” Simply telling a permittee to ensure
that the end result is reached is not a “concrete plan” for
achieving the desired result. Such a directive simply states
the desired result; it does not implement that result.
   Section 1311(b)(1)(C)’s other directive—that the EPA im-
pose limitations that are “necessary to meet” certain water
quality standards–is similar. The verb to “meet,” in the
sense operative here, means “to comply with; fulfill; satisfy”
or “to come into conformity with.” Random House Una-
bridged Dictionary 1195 (2d ed. 1987). Thus, a limitation
that is “necessary to meet” an objective is most naturally
understood to mean a provision that sets out actions that
must be taken to achieve the objective.
   In assessing what the directives in §1131(b)(1)(C) mean,
12      CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                      Opinion of the Court

it is helpful to consider the use of the relevant terms in eve-
ryday speech. Suppose a State requires that all schools
“meet” certain standards of math proficiency, and suppose
the principal of a school calls a faculty meeting and in-
structs the teachers to “implement” those standards. The
principal’s obvious expectation would be that the teachers
would devise and “implement” a plan to make sure that the
desired end is “met.” It is unlikely that the principal would
be happy if the teachers simply told their students that a
state math proficiency test would be administered and that
they should make sure they passed. That would not consti-
tute the implementation of the desired end, i.e., meeting the
State’s standard of math proficiency.
   Attempting to counter this interpretation, the EPA
stresses §1311(b)(1)(C)’s use of the term “any” in the phrase
“any more stringent limitation,” arguing that “any” is a very
broad term. That argument misconstrues the term’s effect.
The adjective “any” is indeed a broad term, but it cannot
expand the reach of the noun it modifies. A reference to
“any mammal” would capture all mammals, but it would
not encompass a bird or fish. Similarly, §1311(b)(1)(C) en-
compasses any limitation that is necessary to meet or im-
plement water quality standards, but not provisions that do
not fall within that category.
                              B
  The text of the CWA militates against the Government’s
interpretation of §1311(b)(1)(C) for yet another reason that
stands out when the history of federal water pollution con-
trol legislation is kept in mind. Under the Government’s
reading, a permittee may be held liable if the quality of the
water into which it discharges pollutants fails to meet wa-
ter quality standards. Before 1972, the WPCA contained a
provision that did exactly that in no uncertain terms. But
when Congress overhauled the WPCA in 1972, it scrapped
that provision and did not include in the new version of the
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)          13

                     Opinion of the Court

Act anything remotely similar. Under these circumstances,
the absence of a comparable provision in the CWA is telling.
   This glaring void resulted from a deliberate and promi-
nent policy choice. As recounted earlier, before 1972, the
basic structure of federal enforcement efforts was a lawsuit
seeking to hold a polluter accountable for contributing to
what amounted to or was expressly termed a violation of
water quality standards. Building on the enforcement
model originally adopted in the 1948 Act, the 1965 amend-
ments of the WPCA required the adoption of “water quality
standards,” and they then provided that “violators” of these
standards were subject to suit by the United States. 79
Stat. 907–909. That is where matters stood until 1972
when Congress again amended the WPCA by deleting its
entire text and substituting what is now popularly called
the CWA.
   This overhaul of the WPCA continued to require the
adoption of water standards, 33 U. S. C. §1313, but the re-
vised statutory text conspicuously omitted any provision
authorizing either the United States or any other party to
bring suit against an entity whose discharges were contrib-
uting to a violation of those standards.
   This omission cannot be viewed as accidental or inconse-
quential. The repealed enforcement provision went to the
heart of what Congress viewed as a major defect in the old
scheme. As we have noted, the 1972 overhaul aimed to fa-
cilitate enforcement by “making it unnecessary to work
backward from an overpolluted body of water to determine
which point sources [were] responsible” and thus subject to
suit. EPA v. California, 426 U. S., at 204. Instead, the
amended WPCA sought to achieve “acceptable quality
standards” by means of “direct restrictions” on polluters.
Ibid. The Government’s interpretation would undo what
Congress plainly sought to achieve when it scrapped the
14        CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

WPCA’s backward-looking approach.12
                              C
  It is a “ ‘fundamental canon of statutory construction that
the words of a statute must be read in their context and
with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme.’ ”
Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA, 573 U. S. 302, 320
(2014) (quoting FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.,
529 U. S. 120, 133 (2000)). Thus, in construing §1311, we
must also take into account the broader statutory scheme,
and at least two features of that scheme point in favor of
our interpretation.
                                1
   The first is the so-called “permit shield” provision, 33
U. S. C. §1342(k), under which a permittee is deemed to be
in compliance with the CWA if it follows all the terms in its
permit. This protection is very valuable because violations
of the CWA, even if entirely inadvertent, are subject to
hefty penalties. The CWA imposes a regime of strict civil
liability, see, e.g., United States v. Allegheny Ludlum Corp.,
366 F. 3d 164, 174 (CA3 2004), and a party that violates a
permit term may be fined up to $25,000 per day per viola-
tion. §1319(d). As San Francisco explains, it may take
months to gather the information necessary to detect a drop
below the applicable water quality standards, see Tr. of


——————
  12 The dissent suggests that the 1972 Congress was displeased with the

prior enforcement regime because it was too burdensome for the Govern-
ment, not because it was unfair for entities against which enforcement
actions were brought. See post, at 8–9 (BARRETT, J., dissenting in part).
But whether or not this assessment of Congress’s intent is correct, what
matters for present purposes is that Congress deliberately deleted a
longstanding provision that expressly authorized what the dissent
wishes to perpetuate. The idea that Congress sought to preserve the old
enforcement mechanism by squirreling it away in §1311(b)(1)(B)’s inapt
language defies belief.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           15

                      Opinion of the Court

Oral Arg. 16, and after substandard water quality is de-
tected, it may take some time to devise and implement ap-
propriate corrective measures. Indeed, there may be occa-
sions (such as the multiple-discharger situation we discuss
below, see infra this page and 16), when there is nothing a
permittee can do to bring about a prompt correction. For
these reasons, the potential civil penalties for noncompli-
ance can mount up and reach enormous sums. In a pending
suit against San Francisco regarding the Bayside facility,
the penalties sought are $10 billion. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
102. In addition to all this, a permittee who is found to have
acted “knowingly” or even “negligently” may be criminally
prosecuted. §1319(c).
   Because of the harsh penalties for violating the terms of
a permit, the permit shield is invaluable. Because of it, a
discharger that complies with all permit conditions can rest
assured that it will not be penalized. But the benefit of this
provision would be eviscerated if the EPA could impose a
permit provision making the permittee responsible for any
drop in water quality below the accepted standard. A per-
mittee could do everything required by all the other permit
terms. It could devise a careful plan for protecting water
quality, and it could diligently implement that plan. But if,
in the end, the quality of the water in its receiving waters
dropped below the applicable water quality levels, it would
face dire potential consequences. It is therefore exceedingly
hard to reconcile the Government’s interpretation of
§1311(b)(1)(C) with the permit shield. And contrary to the
Government’s contention, the possibility that a court might
ultimately exercise its “broad discretion” to mitigate penal-
ties, see Brief for Respondent 44 (internal quotation marks
omitted), is not enough to make up for disarming the shield.
                            2
 One final structural feature cements the case against the
EPA’s interpretation: the absence of any provision dealing
16        CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                          Opinion of the Court

with the problem that arises when more than one permittee
discharges into a body of water with substandard water
quality. As previously explained, it is hard to believe that
the 1972 Congress used §1311(b)(1)(C) to perpetuate (in
camouflaged form) the backward-looking enforcement
scheme in the prior version of the WPCA. And it is even
harder to accept the proposition that Congress did that
without setting out any method for dealing with the multi-
discharger problem. “[T]here may be dozens or even hun-
dreds of . . . permitted and unpermitted discharges into the
same waterbody.” Brief for National Mining Association et
al. as Amici Curiae 9. In such situations, the pre-1972 en-
forcement scheme made it necessary for federal authorities
to “unscramble the polluted eggs after the fact.” Wilming-
ton v. United States, 157 Fed. Cl. 705, 710 (2022). By 1972,
it was recognized that this was impractical, yet the EPA
maintains that Congress retained the backward-looking ap-
proach without making any attempt to address the vexing
multiple-discharger problem.
   The EPA’s only response to this argument is to note that
in this case the Oceanside facility is the only entity that dis-
charges into the relevant area of the Pacific Ocean. But the
multiple-discharger problem goes to the meaning of
§1311(b)(1)(C), and that provision cannot mean one thing
in a single-discharger case and another when there are mul-
tiple dischargers.13

——————
   13 In response to our arguments about the two structural features dis-

cussed above, the dissent contends that our interpretation of
§1311(b)(1)(C) is not necessary to protect permittees because even with-
out that interpretation a permittee subjected to an end-result provision
could challenge it as arbitrary and capricious. See post, at 10–12 (opinion
of BARRETT, J.). Of course, that response is no answer to our argument
that §1311(b)(1)(C) does not authorize end-result provisions in the first
place. And in any event, it is not clear that individual arbitrary-and-
capricious challenges would provide adequate protection. Unless some
form of judicial relief could be obtained before an end-result provision
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     17

                           Opinion of the Court

                            IV
  Before concluding, we briefly address three additional ar-
guments advanced by the Government.
                              A
   The EPA maintains that the imposition of end-result lim-
itations is the best course of action when “the information
necessary to develop additional ‘effluent limitations’ is un-
available.” Brief for Respondent 41. And it complains that
it should not bear the burden of determining what a per-
mittee should do to protect water quality because a permit-
tee is likely to have better access to necessary information
and a superior understanding of the operation of its facility
and the changes that could be made to provide further pro-
tection for water quality.
   We are not moved by this argument. For one thing, it
appears that the EPA and state permitting authorities have
used end-result requirements routinely, not just when a
permit holder has failed to provide necessary information.
See In re Lowell, 18 E. A. D. 115, 176 (EAB 2020); App. to
Pet. for Cert. 519. And in any event, the EPA possesses the
expertise (which it regularly touts in litigation) and the re-
sources necessary to determine what a permittee should do.
It is also armed with ample tools to deal with situations in
which a permittee is slow to provide needed information or
is otherwise uncooperative. The EPA can set a schedule for
the provision of information and can refuse to issue a per-
mit until the permittee complies. If necessary, it can make
use of its emergency powers. See 33 U. S. C. §1364.14
——————
took effect, a permittee’s potential liability could reach astronomical pro-
portions before the challenge was finally resolved.
  14 The dissent argues that end-result provisions are in the best inter-

ests of regulated entities because the alternative may be delay in the
issuance of permits. Post, at 14 (opinion of BARRETT, J.). If that were
true, one would expect regulated parties to favor such provisions, but
none has done so. On the contrary, a long list of municipalities and other
18        CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                           Opinion of the Court

                              B
  The EPA contends that Congress authorized the use of
end-result requirements when it codified the Agency’s CSO
Policy in 1994, see 33 U. S. C. §1342(q)(1). And in support
of that argument, it cites language in the policy that per-
tains to phase I permits. But the permit in question here is
a phase II permit, and the EPA does not claim that its in-
terpretation is supported by any CSO Policy provision re-
lating to such permits.15
  In any event, the phase I language to which the EPA
points does not authorize the imposition of end-result re-
quirements. The policy states that a phase I permit should
require a permittee to “[c]omply with applicable [water
quality standards] . . . expressed in the form of a narrative
——————
permittees support San Francisco’s position. See supra, at 2; infra, at
19–20. These sophisticated entities are better positioned than the dis-
sent to judge what is good for them.
   15 In fact, the CSO Control Policy specifies exactly what a phase II per-

mit should contain, and those requirements are inconsistent with the
end-result limitation that the EPA imposes here. Under the policy, a
phase II should contain: (1) “[r]equirements to implement the
technology-based controls”; (2) “[n]arrative requirements which insure
[sic] that the selected CSO controls are implemented, operated and main-
tained as described in the long-term CSO control plan”; (3) “[w]ater
quality-based effluent limitations . . . requiring, at a minimum, compli-
ance with . . . numeric performance standards for the selected CSO con-
trols”; (4) “[a] requirement to implement, with an established schedule,
the approved post-construction water quality assessment program”; (5)
“[a] requirement to reassess overflows to sensitive areas in those cases
where elimination or relocation of the overflows is not physically possible
and economically achievable”; (6) “[c]onditions establishing require-
ments for maximizing the treatment of wet weather flows”; and (7) “[a]
reopener clause authorizing the NPDES authority to reopen and modify
the permit upon determination that the CSO controls fail to meet [water
quality standards] or protect designated uses.” 59 Fed. Reg. 18696.
Again, although the purpose is to improve the quality of the relevant
bodies of water, these permitting components all relate to the dis-
chargers’ behavior and the permitting authority’s supervision of that be-
havior.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           19

                     Opinion of the Court

limitation.” 59 Fed. Reg. 18696 (emphasis added). Our de-
cision does not rule out “narrative limitations.” “Limita-
tions,” as we understand the term, see supra, at 10–11, are
permitted under §1311(b)(1)(C), and limitations may be ex-
pressed in both numerical and non-numerical (i.e., “narra-
tive”) form.
   Attempting to read more into the phase I language, the
EPA cites guidance it issued in 1995, but Congress did not
codify that guidance, and we are not obligated to accept ad-
ministrative guidance that conflicts with the statutory lan-
guage it purports to implement. See Loper Bright Enter-
prises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369 (2024). We also note that
other guidance issued by the EPA is arguably inconsistent.
See EPA, Combined Sewer Overflows: Guidance for Permit
Writers, at A–1 to A–7.
                               C
   Finally, the EPA contends that the rejection of its inter-
pretation of 33 U. S. C. §1311(b)(1)(C) would have disrup-
tive consequences for businesses that rely on “general per-
mits.” Brief for Respondent 38; Tr. of Oral Arg. 83.
(General permits cover an entire category of point sources
in a given area. See South Fla. Water Management Dist. v.
Miccosukee Tribe, 541 U. S. 95, 108, n. * (2004).) Such per-
mits are important for certain businesses, such as home
builders, other construction companies, and certain agricul-
tural enterprises, see Brief for National Association of
Home Builders et al. as Amici Curiae 1, 11, but no such
company has submitted a brief supporting the EPA’s inter-
pretation. On the contrary, a brief filed on behalf of such
companies urges us to reject the EPA’s position. Id., at 4–
7. What is important, these companies tell us, are narra-
tive limitations other than end-result requirements, and
they specifically cite provisions demanding compliance with
“best-management practices” and “operational require-
20         CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                       Opinion of the Court

ments and prohibitions.” Our decision allows such require-
ments.
                            V
  In sum, we hold that §1311(b)(1)(C) does not authorize
the EPA to include “end-result” provisions in NPDES per-
mits. Determining what steps a permittee must take to en-
sure that water quality standards are met is the EPA’s re-
sponsibility, and Congress has given it the tools needed to
make that determination. If the EPA does what the CWA
demands, water quality will not suffer.
                         *    *    *
     The judgment of the Ninth Circuit is reversed.

                                              It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

                  BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                           _________________

                           No. 23–753
                           _________________


       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO,
       CALIFORNIA, PETITIONER v. ENVIRON-
          MENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
                         [March 4, 2025]

   JUSTICE BARRETT, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR,
JUSTICE KAGAN, and JUSTICE JACKSON join, dissenting in
part.
   The Environmental Protection Agency issued San Fran-
cisco a permit allowing it to discharge pollutants from its
combined sewer system into the Pacific Ocean. The permit,
of course, does not give the city free rein, and among its con-
ditions are prohibitions on discharges that contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards. San Fran-
cisco challenges these conditions on the ground that EPA
lacks statutory authority to impose them. The city is
wrong. The relevant provision of the Clean Water Act di-
rects EPA to impose “any more stringent limitation” that is
“necessary to meet . . . or required to implement any appli-
cable water quality standard.” 33 U. S. C. §1311(b)(1)(C).
Conditions that forbid the city to violate water quality
standards are plainly “limitations” on the city’s license to
discharge.
   Notwithstanding the straightforward statutory lan-
guage, the Court sides with San Francisco. I join Part II of
its opinion, which rightly rejects the city’s primary argu-
ment. In Part III, however, the Court embraces an equally
weak theory—that the permit’s restrictions are not “limita-
tions,” as that word is ordinarily used. The Court’s analysis
2       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                  BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

is contrary to the text, so I respectfully dissent in part.
                              I
                              A
   Under the Clean Water Act, “the discharge of any pollu-
tant by any person” is unlawful except as expressly author-
ized. 33 U. S. C. §1311(a). As relevant here, authorization
comes in the form of “National Pollutant Discharge Elimi-
nation System (NPDES) permits,” which EPA (or, in some
circumstances, a State) may issue to allow discharges. Be-
fore issuing a permit, however, the Agency must ensure
that “such discharge will meet . . . all applicable require-
ments” under several different statutory provisions.
§1342(a)(1).
   Section 1311(b) is one such provision. It works in two
steps for permits like San Francisco’s. First, under
§1311(b)(1)(A), EPA must set “effluent limitations” that
“shall require the application of the best practicable control
technology currently available.” “ ‘[E]ffluent limitation’ ” re-
fers to a restriction “on quantities, rates, and concentra-
tions of chemical, physical, biological, and other constitu-
ents which are discharged from point sources” into waters
subject to EPA’s jurisdiction. §1362(11).
   Second, under §1311(b)(1)(C), EPA must impose “any
more stringent limitation, including those necessary to
meet water quality standards, . . . or required to implement
any applicable water quality standard.” Water quality
standards—which are devised by the States and subject to
federal approval—“consist of the designated uses of the
navigable waters involved and the water quality criteria for
such waters based upon such uses.” §1313(c)(2)(A). Efflu-
ent limitations, standing alone, are not always sufficient to
protect the desired water quality, as set forth in the water
quality standards. So point sources, “ ‘despite individual
compliance with effluent limitations, may be further regu-
lated to prevent water quality from falling below acceptable
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

levels.’ ” Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U. S. 91, 101 (1992)
(quoting EPA v. California ex rel. State Water Resources
Control Bd., 426 U. S. 200, 205, n. 12 (1976)). Importantly,
the Act does not itself require dischargers to heed water
quality standards; the standards are enforceable only inso-
far as they are incorporated into permit conditions under
§1311(b)(1)(C).
  Section 1311(b) therefore sets forth a coherent regime. In
the first instance, EPA regulates water pollution through
technology-based effluent limitations that restrict the
“quantities, rates, and concentrations” of harmful materials
that permittees may discharge. §1362(11). But when the
technology-based effluent limitations are insufficient to en-
sure that the water quality standards are met, EPA has
supplemental authority to impose further limitations.
                              B
  As the Court explains, San Francisco operates a com-
bined sewer system, which transports sewage and storm-
water runoff via the same conduits. See ante, at 5–7. Such
systems occasionally overflow in wet weather—and when
they do, they discharge both stormwater and untreated
sewage into waters potentially regulated by the Clean Wa-
ter Act. 59 Fed. Reg. 18689 (1994). As relevant here, “com-
bined sewer overflow” events from one component of San
Francisco’s sewer system result in the discharge of pollu-
tants into the Pacific Ocean via the Southwest Ocean Out-
fall, which is located within EPA’s jurisdiction, 3.3 nautical
miles off the coast of San Francisco. These discharges are
presumptively unlawful under §1311(a) and hence require
a permit.
  The city’s NPDES permit contains both the technology-
based effluent limitations required by §1311(b)(1)(A) and
additional limitations to protect the water quality stand-
ards under §1311(b)(1)(C). This latter category includes
two “receiving water limitations”—requirements defining
4       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

the permissible discharge by reference to its effect on the
quality of the waters that receive it, rather than by refer-
ence to the nature of the discharge itself. (These are what
the Court calls “ ‘end-result’ requirements.” Ante, at 2.) The
first states that San Francisco “shall not cause or contribute
to a violation of any applicable water quality standard.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 97. The second provides that “[n]ei-
ther the treatment nor the discharge of pollutants shall cre-
ate pollution, contamination, or nuisance” as defined by the
California Water Code. Id., at 339.
   The city’s permit thus tracks the structure of §1311(b). It
restrains discharges initially through technology-based ef-
fluent limitations, as required by §1311(b)(1)(A). But be-
cause the effluent limitations may be insufficient to ensure
that California’s water quality standards are met, the per-
mit contains supplemental limitations, as required by
§1311(b)(1)(C). The concern that the technology-based ef-
fluent limitations may fall short is on display in this case—
discharges from components of San Francisco’s sewer sys-
tem have allegedly led to serious breaches of the water
quality standards, such as “discoloration, scum, and float-
ing material, including toilet paper, in Mission Creek.”
Complaint in United States v. City and County of San Fran-
cisco, No. 3:24–cv–02594 (ND Cal., May 1, 2024), ECF Doc.
1, p. 22. The receiving water limitations imposed under
§1311(b)(1)(C) are included to ensure that such breaches do
not occur.
                             II
                             A
  San Francisco dedicates almost all its briefing to the
proposition that the receiving water limitations are unlaw-
ful because §1311(b)(1)(C) allows only effluent limitations.
In other words, San Francisco reads the phrase “any more
stringent limitation” to mean “any more stringent effluent
limitation.” As the Court explains, this argument is flatly
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

inconsistent with the text of §1311(b). See ante, at 7–9. In
my view, the failure of that argument should have ended
this case.
   The Court continues, however, with a theory largely of its
own making. Whatever “any more stringent limitation”
may mean, the Court says, it does not authorize EPA to di-
rect permittees to comply with the water quality standards.
   This conclusion is puzzling. The entire function of
§1311(b)(1)(C) is to ensure that permitted discharges do not
violate state water quality standards. And as discussed
above, the provision gives EPA broad authority to achieve
that aim through conditions imposed in NPDES permits.
Why would that broad authority not allow EPA to tell per-
mittees that they must not cause or contribute to a violation
of the very standards that §1311(b)(1)(C) serves to safe-
guard?
   The answer, according to the Court, is that a restriction
does not count as a “limitation” if the permittee must iden-
tify the steps necessary to comply with it. Ante, at 10. San
Francisco’s permit only authorizes discharges that do not
degrade water quality below the applicable standard. It is
up to the city, however, to formulate a plan to achieve that
result. The city’s plan, the Court asserts, is a “limitation”
on its discharges, but the permit condition is not. See ibid.
As best I can tell, the Court thinks that only the “direct
source of restriction or restraint”—apparently, the most
specific restriction—counts as a “limitation.” Ibid.
   The Court offers nothing to substantiate this proposition,
and it is wrong as a matter of ordinary English. It is com-
monplace for “limitations” to state “that a particular end
result must be achieved and that it is up to the [recipient]
to figure out what it should do.” Ibid. For example, a com-
pany could impose spending “limitations” by requiring each
branch to spend no more than its allotted budget, while still
leaving branch managers flexibility to determine how to al-
locate those funds. A doctor could impose a “limitation” on
6         CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                     BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

a patient’s diet by telling the patient that she must lose 20
pounds over the next six months, even if the doctor does not
prescribe a specific diet and exercise regimen. And an air-
line could impose a “limitation” on the weight of checked
bags, even though it does not tell passengers what items to
pack. “Limitations” can be general as well as specific, and
general limitations can call for more specific ones.
   In this context, “limitation” is simply a synonym for “[a]
restrictive condition.” Funk & Wagnalls New Standard
Dictionary of the English Language 1437 (1952). And con-
ditions can be stated at many levels of generality—includ-
ing in terms of end results. A college may condition a schol-
arship on the student’s maintenance of a minimum GPA. A
homeowner may condition payment for a new roof on the
contractor’s satisfaction of industry standards. An em-
ployer may condition job perks on the employee’s perfor-
mance. In each example, the condition is a limitation on a
benefit or payment. There are strings attached.
   The Court also misconstrues §1311(b)(1)(C)’s reference to
limitations that are “necessary to meet” or “required to im-
plement” the water quality standards. As for the former
phrase, “necessary to meet” does not imply anything about
the specificity or concreteness of the limitations adopted by
EPA. Rather, the limitations on San Francisco’s permit are
“necessary to meet” the water quality standards because
without them, the standards would not bind the city. The
limitations thus ensure that San Francisco will “ ‘comply
with,’ ” “ ‘fulfill,’ ” “ ‘satisfy,’ ” or “ ‘come into conformity with’ ”
the water quality standards. Ante, at 11 (quoting Random
House Unabridged Dictionary 1195 (2d ed. 1987)).
   Nor does the phrase “required to implement” help the
Court. “Implement,” the Court says, generally means “ ‘to
give practical effect to and ensure of actual fulfillment by
concrete measures.’ ” Ante, at 11. That is true but incom-
plete. The full definition reads: “to carry out: ACCOMPLISH,
FULFILL, . . . esp.: to give practical effect to and ensure of
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

actual fulfillment by concrete measures.” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1134 (1976). So while the
word is often used in the sense of taking “concrete
measures,” such measures are not necessary to satisfy the
definition of “implement.”
   Regardless, the receiving water limitations “implement”
the water quality standards in both the broad and narrow
senses of the word. They are required to “carry out[,] ac-
complish, [or] fulfill” the standards: When effluent limita-
tions fall short, discharges from the city’s combined sewer
system will otherwise degrade water quality below the ap-
plicable standard. Ibid. (capitalization altered). And the
limitations are “concrete measures,” ibid., because they are
the means by which EPA “implement[s] any applicable wa-
ter quality standard,” §1311(b)(1)(C). They give the stand-
ards “practical effect” by making them enforceable. Id., at
1134.
   There is no getting around it: The receiving water limita-
tions are “limitations.” If they are vague or unreasonable,
they are vulnerable to challenge on one or both of those
grounds. See, e.g., Natural Resources Defense Council v.
EPA, 808 F. 3d 556, 578 (CA2 2015) (invalidating a receiv-
ing water limitation as arbitrary and capricious). But even
a vague or unreasonable limitation is still a “limitation.”
                              B
  With the text of §1311(b)(1)(C) against it, the Court tries
to marshal support for its approach from the Clean Water
Act’s history, as well as from what the Court describes as
the “broader statutory scheme.” Ante, at 12–16. Neither
helps.
                              1
   As for the statutory history: Advancing a specific theory
of the congressional intent behind the Clean Water Act, the
Court contends that EPA’s interpretation would revive the
8       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                  BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

“backward-looking” policy regime that the Act was designed
to replace. See ante, at 12–14. Before the Act, the United
States enforced federal water pollution laws primarily
through abatement actions. See 33 U. S. C. §1160 (1970
ed.). Though the Act abolished this cause of action, the
Court claims that receiving water limitations function in
essentially the same way. Just as the United States did
when it brought abatement suits, EPA would have to “ ‘work
backward from an overpolluted body of water’ ” to combat
water pollution. Ante, at 13 (quoting State Water Resources
Control Bd., 426 U. S., at 204). Thus, the Court insists, the
use of receiving water limitations would “undo” the Act’s
shift from abatement suits to “ ‘direct restrictions’ on pollut-
ers.” Ante, at 13 (quoting State Water Resources Control
Bd., 426 U. S., at 204).
  Of course, no theory of “what Congress plainly sought to
achieve,” ante, at 13–14, could justify an implausible inter-
pretation of §1311(b)(1)(C). Here, however, the Court does
not even deliver on the claim that its account “plainly”
tracks Congress’s goal. Ante, at 13–14. Because receiving
water limitations do not actually replicate the old abate-
ment regime, the Court’s rendition is not the only (much
less the most obvious) explanation for the statutory before
and after. There is another explanation, and it is one in
which receiving water limitations fit right in.
  Under the old system, the United States could bring
abatement actions only after the pollution had already oc-
curred. See 33 U. S. C. §1160(c)(5) (1970 ed.). A glaring
problem with this approach is that an ex post enforcement
regime does not adequately deter polluters or prevent pol-
lution. Making matters worse, this regime involved “cum-
brous enforcement procedures” that made it next to impos-
sible to bring abatement actions. State Water Resources
Control Bd., 426 U. S., at 202; see also 33 U. S. C. §1160
(1970 ed.) (requiring, prior to an abatement action, that the
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

United States hold a conference of the relevant state agen-
cies, then provide the state agency six months to take reme-
dial action, then call a public hearing with the state agency
and the discharger); K. Murchison, Learning From More
Than Five-and-a-Half Decades of Federal Water Pollution
Control Legislation: Twenty Lessons for the Future, 32
Env. Aff. 527, 534 (2005) (“According to a report prepared
by the Senate Committee on Public Works, the federal gov-
ernment initiated only one enforcement action under the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act prior to 1970”).
  Congress chose a different regulatory model when it
adopted the Act in 1972. The Act renders all discharges
presumptively unlawful. Then, under the current ex ante
permitting regime, EPA authorizes only those discharges
that comply with the Act. Should a permittee fail to comply
with the terms of its permit, EPA has broad authority to
sue. See 33 U. S. C. §§1319(b)–(d) (authorizing civil actions
for injunctive relief, civil penalties for violations, and in
some instances criminal sanctions).
  The receiving water limitations imposed under
§1311(b)(1)(C) are entirely consistent with this scheme.
Again, the technology-based effluent limitations imposed
under §1311(b)(1)(A) do the primary work of gating dis-
charges at the front end to minimize pollution. The
§1311(b)(1)(C) limitations guard against any residual risk
that discharges will violate the water quality standards.
Because these limitations supplement rather than replace
the technology-based effluent limitations, there is no risk
that broadly worded receiving water limitations will recre-
ate the ineffective abatement regime that prevailed prior to
1972.
  Furthermore, the receiving water limitations operate
within the broader context of the Act’s permitting regime.
These permits impose a prospective requirement on permit-
tees to comply with permit conditions. Under the old re-
gime, a discharger could take an approach of “pollute first
10      CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

and apologize later,” secure in the knowledge that an abate-
ment suit was unlikely and that such a suit would at most
allow judgment to “secur[e] abatement of any pollution
proved.” 33 U. S. C. §1160(h) (1970 ed.). A permittee who
violates a permit condition, by contrast, necessarily exposes
itself to enforcement actions by EPA, as well as potential
penalties. See 33 U. S. C. §§1319(b)–(d). Receiving water
limitations, like any other permit condition, thus operate as
“ ‘direct restrictions’ on polluters.” Ante, at 13 (quoting
State Water Resources Control Bd., 426 U. S., at 204).
                                 2
   The Court also claims that the receiving water limita-
tions are inconsistent with two features of the “broader
statutory scheme.” Ante, at 14–16. First, it contends that
the receiving water limitations are at odds with the permit
shield provision because violations of the permit condition
(and the attendant liability) are hard to predict. Ante, at
14–15. Second, it argues that the Clean Water Act is silent
about the problem of multiple dischargers into the same
body of water—and if the Act allowed EPA to condition a
permit on maintaining water quality standards, the Court
says, it surely would have spelled out how to deal with such
an obvious complication. Ante, at 15–16. Both of these ar-
guments boil down to the Court’s concern that receiving wa-
ter limitations might be unfair to permittees. In some cir-
cumstances, they might be. But any unfairness should be
addressed through arbitrary-and-capricious challenges—
not a statutory rewrite.
   Start with the permit shield provision. Under §1342(k),
compliance with the terms of a permit “shall be deemed
compliance” with various substantive provisions of the Act,
thereby shielding permit holders from liability. The Court
insists that receiving water limitations like those in the
city’s permit would “eviscerat[e]” that benefit by failing to
provide fair notice. Ante, at 14–15.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

   The permit shield provision, however, serves the specific
role of immunizing permittees that comply with a permit.
See §1342(k). For instance, it “insulate[s] permit holders
from changes in various regulations during the period of a
permit” and “relieve[s] them of having to litigate in an en-
forcement action the question whether their permits are
sufficiently strict.” E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. v. Train,
430 U. S. 112, 138, n. 28 (1977). The receiving water limi-
tations do not eliminate that benefit. It remains true that
San Francisco cannot be sued under the theory that the
city’s permit is insufficient to ensure compliance with the
Act.
   Really, the Court’s argument reduces to the broader pol-
icy concern that it may be difficult for regulated entities to
comply with receiving water limitations and that they may
lack adequate notice of a violation. But again, that concern
goes to the question whether a particular receiving water
limitation is rational. If a permittee cannot reasonably de-
termine how to comply with a receiving water limitation,
then the permit condition may be invalidated as arbitrary
and capricious. (In fact, San Francisco made arbitrary-and-
capricious arguments below, but the Ninth Circuit rejected
them; the city did not seek this Court’s review of that issue.
See 75 F. 4th 1074, 1092–1093 (2023).) And as EPA
acknowledged at oral argument, the Agency “may not im-
pose limitations of any kind that are unconstitutionally
vague.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 51. These concerns do not speak to
the relevant question here, which is whether receiving wa-
ter limitations comport with the Act.
   The Court is also wrong to suggest that receiving water
limitations are categorically impermissible because there
may be multiple dischargers into one body of water in some
circumstances. See ante, at 15–16. It makes little sense to
say that an agency always lacks authority to take a certain
action just because the action would be unreasonable in
some scenarios. And as the Court itself recognizes, there is
12      CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

no multiple-discharger problem here: San Francisco is the
only significant discharger at the Southwest Ocean Outfall.
Ante, at 16. If EPA does start imposing receiving water lim-
itations in contexts where permittees cannot control the
quality of the receiving waters—such as where there are
multiple dischargers—then, again, the permittee can bring
an arbitrary-and-capricious challenge.
                               3
   Finally, the Court downplays the valuable uses of receiv-
ing water limitations. To begin, EPA imposes such limita-
tions when the Agency “lacks the information necessary to
develop more tailored limitations.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 51.
That is the case here: San Francisco has consistently failed
to update its Long-Term Control Plan for managing com-
bined sewer overflows. See 75 F. 4th, at 1095 (observing
that San Francisco has not updated its plan since 1991). By
imposing receiving water limitations, EPA was neverthe-
less able to issue a permit to San Francisco while complying
with the Clean Water Act.
   The Court does not explain what other course of action
EPA could take. Instead, it states, without citation, that
“EPA possesses the expertise . . . and the resources neces-
sary to determine what a permittee should do.” Ante, at 17.
This bare assertion simply ignores the obvious problem—
how is EPA expected to deploy its expertise when it lacks
the basic information necessary to make a decision? The
Court also suggests that the Agency could refuse to issue a
permit until the applicant provides the necessary infor-
mation. Ibid. But this gives the game away: The entire
point of EPA’s argument is that it is preferable for EPA to
impose broadly worded conditions in its permits than to
deny permits altogether and potentially shut down San
Francisco’s sewer system. Nor can EPA simply “make use
of its emergency powers” when permittees fail to provide
necessary information. Ibid. Such powers are available
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             13

                  BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

only when there is “imminent and substantial endanger-
ment to the health of persons or to . . . the livelihood of . . .
persons.” §1364(a). As the name “emergency” suggests,
these powers provide a limited avenue for the Agency to sue
in response to a crisis. They do not provide a solution to the
problem of non-compliant permittees.
   Receiving water limitations are also useful when EPA is-
sues general permits to broad categories of dischargers
(such as for construction projects). See South Fla. Water
Management Dist. v. Miccosukee Tribe, 541 U. S. 95, 108,
n. (2004) (observing that such “permits greatly reduce . . .
administrative burden by authorizing discharges from a
category of point sources within a specified geographic
area”). In lieu of individualized and prescriptive permitting
conditions—which would take time to craft and with which
small businesses might have difficulty complying—EPA in-
stead allows the permittee to proceed under more general
language. EPA can therefore issue the permit quickly and
give responsible permittees flexibility to choose how to com-
ply with the permit.
   After today, the alternative for entities seeking a general
permit is not for EPA to issue the permit without the
§1311(b)(1)(C) limitation. Instead, the alternative is for the
permit to be delayed or even denied. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 83
(If the Court “take[s] away [EPA’s] ability to rely on these
sorts of prohibitions,” then the Agency is “going to need to
ask for more information because it’s only with that infor-
mation” that the Agency can “develop more tailored limita-
tions”). Section 1311(b)(1)(C) is not optional; EPA is re-
quired to issue the limitations necessary to ensure that the
water quality standards are met. So taking a tool away
from EPA may make it harder for the Agency to issue the
permits that municipalities and businesses need in order
for their discharges to be lawful.
   The Court dismisses this concern, noting that “no . . .
14      CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO v. EPA

                 BARRETT, J., dissenting in part

company has submitted a brief supporting . . . EPA’s inter-
pretation.” Ante, at 19. But there is no reason to think that
the sampling of trade associations from which this Court
happens to hear reflects the views of all potentially affected
parties. And in any event, neither the cited amicus brief
nor the Court itself has any response to EPA’s straightfor-
ward point: If the Agency must impose individualized con-
ditions for each permittee under §1311(b)(1)(C), then it will
be more difficult and more time consuming for the Agency
to issue permits.
                        *     *     *
  Receiving water limitations are not categorically incon-
sistent with the Clean Water Act. Because the Court holds
otherwise, I respectfully dissent in part.