Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            1




SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                         No. 24A1063
                         _________________


   SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, ET AL. v.
   AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY,
       AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES, ET AL.
                 ON APPLICATION FOR STAY
                        [June 6, 2025]

   On January 20, 2025, the President signed an executive
order “establish[ing] the Department of Government Effi-
ciency” (DOGE) with the goal of “modernizing Federal tech-
nology and software to maximize governmental efficiency
and productivity.” Exec. Order No. 14158, 90 Fed. Reg.
8441. The executive order requires agency heads to estab-
lish “DOGE Team[s]” within their agencies and to “ensure
[DOGE] has full and prompt access to all unclassified
agency records, software systems, and IT systems” in a
manner “consistent with applicable law.” Id., §§3(c), 4(b),
5(b). On April 17, the District Court preliminarily enjoined
the Social Security Administration (SSA) from granting
DOGE affiliates access to various SSA records, subject to
certain exceptions. The en banc Fourth Circuit denied the
Government’s request to stay the preliminary injunction by
a vote of nine to six. The Government now seeks a stay from
this Court.
   When considering whether to grant a stay, this Court
looks to four factors: “(1) whether the stay applicant has
made a strong showing that he is likely to succeed on the
merits; (2) whether the applicant will be irreparably injured
absent a stay; (3) whether issuance of the stay will substan-
tially injure the other parties interested in the proceeding;
and (4) where the public interest lies.” Nken v. Holder, 556
U. S. 418, 434 (2009) (quoting Hilton v. Braunskill, 481
2                       SSA v. AFSCME

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

U. S. 770, 776 (1987)). After review, we determine that the
application of these factors in this case warrants granting
the requested stay. We conclude that, under the present
circumstances, SSA may proceed to afford members of the
SSA DOGE Team access to the agency records in question
in order for those members to do their work.
   The application for stay presented to THE CHIEF JUSTICE
and by him referred to the Court is granted. The April 17,
2025, preliminary injunction entered by the United States
District Court for the District of Maryland, case No. 1:25–
cv–596, is stayed pending the disposition of the appeal in
the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
and disposition of a petition for a writ of certiorari, if such
a writ is timely sought. Should certiorari be denied, this
stay shall terminate automatically. In the event certiorari
is granted, the stay shall terminate upon the sending down
of the judgment of this Court.
   JUSTICE KAGAN would deny the application.
   JUSTICE JACKSON, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR joins,
dissenting from the grant of application for stay.
   Today the Court grants “emergency” relief that allows the
Social Security Administration (SSA) to hand DOGE staff-
ers the highly sensitive data of millions of Americans. The
Government wants to give DOGE unfettered access to this
personal, non-anonymized information right now—before
the courts have time to assess whether DOGE’s access is
lawful. So it asks this Court to stay a lower court’s decision
to place temporary and qualified limits on DOGE’s data ac-
cess while litigation challenging DOGE’s authority to ac-
cess the data is pending. But the Government fails to sub-
stantiate its stay request by showing that it or the public
will suffer irreparable harm absent this Court’s interven-
tion. In essence, the “urgency” underlying the Govern-
ment’s stay application is the mere fact that it cannot be
bothered to wait for the litigation process to play out before
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

proceeding as it wishes.
   That sentiment has traditionally been insufficient to jus-
tify the kind of extraordinary intervention the Government
seeks. But, once again, this Court dons its emergency-re-
sponder gear, rushes to the scene, and uses its equitable
power to fan the flames rather than extinguish them. See,
e.g., Noem v. Doe, 605 U. S. ___, ___ (2025) (JACKSON, J.,
dissenting from grant of application for stay) (slip op., at 5)
(explaining that, by granting a stay, the Court was allowing
the Government to terminate the lawful parole status of
half a million noncitizens before the courts could determine
whether such agency action was lawful). Once again, re-
spectfully, I dissent.
                               I
                               A
   The SSA and the sensitive data it collects are well known
to Americans who entrust their information to that govern-
ment agency. Social Security numbers, birth dates, ad-
dresses, bank-account numbers, medical records—all of
that, and more, is in the mix. Every person who has re-
ceived a Social Security number appears in the SSA’s data.
And beyond the identification numbers and retirement ben-
efits that bear the agency’s name, the SSA also administers
a host of other programs, such as Social Security Disability
Insurance, which collects detailed medical histories (de-
scribing, for example, prescriptions, mental-health treat-
ments, and testing results for sensitive health conditions
like HIV) from applicants and beneficiaries. See App. to
Application for Stay 98a–99a (App.). Since 1935, the SSA
has been collecting, storing, and, perhaps most importantly,
protecting the information that Americans provide.
   Some of the most critical safeguards are established in a
federal law called the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U. S. C. §552a,
which Congress enacted “to protect the privacy of individu-
4                       SSA v. AFSCME

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

als identified in information systems maintained by Fed-
eral agencies.” §2(a)(5), 88 Stat. 1896. In its findings sup-
porting the Privacy Act, Congress focused on “the collection,
maintenance, use, and dissemination of personal infor-
mation by Federal agencies,” specifically noting that those
agency practices “directly affec[t]” individual privacy.
§2(a)(1), id., at 1896. Congress also recognized “the harm
to individual privacy that can occur” from the Government’s
mishandling of Americans’ sensitive information—harm
that can relate to “employment, insurance, and credit,”
among other areas of life. §§2(a)(2)–(3), ibid.
   To protect against the significant privacy risks that the
Government’s handling of Americans’ sensitive information
creates, the Privacy Act regulates federal agencies’ “collec-
tion, maintenance, use, and dissemination of ” such data.
§2(a)(5), ibid. As relevant here, the Act prohibits agencies
from disclosing covered data except in narrow circum-
stances, such as where agency employees “have a need for
the record in the performance of their duties.” 5 U. S. C.
§552a(b)(1).
   It should come as no surprise, then, that the SSA has long
followed a policy of restricting access to the personal records
the agency maintains, consistent with the Privacy Act and
similar laws. App. 24a, 116a–117a. For example, before
granting its employees access to SSA data, the agency
strictly enforces background checks, training requirements,
and agreements outlining sanctions for misuse of data. Id.,
at 114a–122a. It also limits employees’ access to sensitive
data to only what they need in order to perform their as-
signed job responsibilities. Id., at 114a.
                            B
  The SSA’s established practices for handling Americans’
data changed dramatically after January 20, 2025—the day
the President issued an Executive Order creating the De-
partment of Government Efficiency, or DOGE. Exec. Order
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             5

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

No. 14158, 90 Fed. Reg. 8441. DOGE’s stated purpose was
to “modernize[e] Federal technology and software to max-
imize governmental efficiency and productivity.” Ibid. Ac-
cording to the Government, the core of DOGE’s work in-
volves “ ‘ “identifying fraud, waste, and abuse.” ’ ” App. 41a.
DOGE demanded immediate and unfettered access to the
SSA’s data and systems shortly after its creation. Id., at
46a–48a. And though it encountered initial obstacles,
DOGE soon obtained access to troves of sensitive infor-
mation stored in the SSA’s computer files. Ibid.
    Record evidence reflects that DOGE received far broader
data access than the SSA customarily affords for fraud,
waste, and abuse reviews. A former Acting Chief of Staff at
the SSA recounted that similar investigations typically
“ ‘start with access to high-level, anonymized data based on
the least amount of data the analyst or auditor would need
to know.’ ” Id., at 48a. Only if suspicious entries appear
would the reviewer then gain “ ‘access [to] more granular,
non-anonymized data [limited] to just that subset of files.’ ”
Ibid.
    In February 2025, respondents (two labor unions and a
grassroots advocacy organization) filed a lawsuit in the Dis-
trict of Maryland, seeking to block DOGE from breaching
the SSA’s standard protocols. Respondents alleged that, by
opening the SSA’s data systems to unfettered access by
DOGE personnel, the SSA and DOGE officials had run
afoul of the Privacy Act and the Administrative Procedure
Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. §706(2).
    After assessing the relevant legal factors and evidence,
the District Court entered a preliminary injunction that
temporarily placed qualified limitations on DOGE staffers’
access to SSA data. Its order was accompanied by a 145-
page opinion laying out the court’s legal reasoning and fac-
tual findings. The District Court found, specifically, that
respondents were likely to succeed on the merits of their
6                       SSA v. AFSCME

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

claims that the SSA’s and DOGE’s actions violated the Pri-
vacy Act and the APA. App. 166a. It also found that, absent
temporary injunctive relief, respondents’ members would
suffer irreparable injury from the disclosure of their per-
sonal information to DOGE staffers—harm that could not
later be remedied with money damages. Id., at 161a–162a.
  The Government appealed and requested a stay of the
District Court’s order. The Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit, sitting en banc, declined to stay the preliminary in-
junction pending its resolution of the merits. Id., at 2a. So,
the Government now seeks a stay from us.
                               II
   Just last week, I wrote about the requirements for grant-
ing stay applications and, in particular, how this Court’s
emergency-docket practices were decoupling from the tra-
ditional harm-reduction justification for equitable stays.
See Noem, 605 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5). With today’s
decision, it seems as if the Court has truly lost its moorings.
It interferes with the lower courts’ informed and equitable
assessment of how the SSA’s data is best accessed during
the course of this litigation, and it does so without any
showing by the Government that it will actually suffer con-
crete or irreparable harm from having to comply with the
District Court’s order.
   What the lower courts have done here is carefully craft
interim relief tailored to the needs of the moment. To start,
the District Court received sworn evidence about what
DOGE wants to do and considered all of the interests at
stake. Moreover, and importantly, the District Court re-
peatedly asked the critical question: Why does DOGE need
immediate, unfettered, and unprecedented access to highly
sensitive non-anonymized data to accomplish its objectives?
The Government’s answers were “imprecise, contradictory,
and insufficient.” App. 154a. And when the court requested
further clarification, the Government passed. Id., at 32a
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             7

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

(choosing instead to “ ‘stand on the record in its current
form’ ”). Ultimately, the court found, the Government
“never made clear why . . . the DOGE Team requires unbri-
dled access to the [personally identifiable information] of
countless Americans in order to effectuate [its] responsibil-
ities.” Id., at 154a.
   Despite the Government’s poor showing, the District
Court still structured its injunction in a minimally burden-
some manner from the Government’s standpoint. The in-
junction allows the SSA to provide DOGE staffers with ac-
cess to redacted or anonymized data and SSA records, so
long as DOGE staffers meet the training, background-
check, and other requirements that generally govern such
access. Id., at 170a–171a. The injunction also permits the
SSA to grant DOGE staffers access to “discrete, particular-
ized, and non-anonymized data” if DOGE gives the agency
a written explanation of its specific need for the records.
Id., at 171a. And the injunction expressly leaves intact the
SSA’s “ordinary operations.” Id., at 172a. Thus, in the end,
the District Court’s order amounts to a short-term pause on
giving DOGE unfettered and uniquely unprotected access
to millions of Americans’ sensitive, non-anonymized data,
paired with reasonable conditions on data access in the in-
terim.
   Dissatisfied with even those minor limitations, the Gov-
ernment rushed to the Fourth Circuit and sought a stay of
the District Court’s injunction. That court then considered
the matter en banc, and its judges, too, commented on the
Government’s poor performance. One highlighted “the gov-
ernment’s inability to provide a convincing explanation of
how it will be tangibly and irreparably harmed absent a
stay.” Id., at 15a (Heytens, J., concurring in denial of stay).
Another noted that, based on the record, “DOGE’s work
could be accomplished largely with anonymized and re-
dacted data, along with discrete pieces of non-anonymized
data in limited, appropriate circumstances—as has long
8                       SSA v. AFSCME

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

been typical at SSA for the type of technology upgrades and
waste, abuse, and fraud detection that DOGE claims to be
doing.” Id., at 7a (King, J., concurring in denial of stay).
   The Fourth Circuit’s evaluation led it to deny the Govern-
ment’s request for a stay. Still, that court committed to con-
tinue addressing this matter en banc, and it set a briefing
schedule with respect to the Government’s substantive ap-
peal of the District Court’s preliminary injunction. Briefing
is scheduled to conclude next month, and the arguments
presented will be considered and ruled upon by all the ac-
tive judges on that court.
                               III
  Stepping back to take a birds-eye view of the stay request
before us, the Government’s failure to demonstrate harm
should mean that the general equity balance tips decisively
against granting a stay. See Noem, 605 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 4). On the one hand, there is a repository of millions
of Americans’ legally protected, highly sensitive infor-
mation that—if improperly handled or disseminated—risks
causing significant harm, as Congress has already recog-
nized. On the other, there is the Government’s desire to
ditch the usual protocols for accessing that data, before the
courts have even determined whether DOGE’s access is
lawful. In the first bucket, there is also the state of federal
law, which enshrines privacy protections, and the Presi-
dent’s constitutional obligation to faithfully execute the
laws Congress has passed. This makes it not at all clear
that it is in the public’s interest for the SSA to give DOGE
staffers unfettered access to all Americans’ non-anony-
mized data before its entitlement to such access has been
established, especially when the SSA’s own employees have
long been subject to restrictions meant to protect the Amer-
ican people.
  One more equitable consideration: Throughout the lower
courts’ thorough evaluations, the Government never
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                   9

                        JACKSON, J., dissenting

deigned to substantiate its purported need for unfettered
access, much less demonstrate why it must have that de-
gree of access now. And it produces nothing more on that
score with respect to the “emergency” application this Court
considers today. The lower courts repeatedly placed the
Government on notice of its harm-related failures, yet the
Government still offers us next to nothing to satisfy its bur-
den.*
   In my view, granting the Government a stay on this
plainly deficient showing of harm is also systemically cor-
rosive. We have told everyone that it is “critical” that an
applicant justify its request for a stay from this Court by
showing that it “ ‘will be irreparably injured absent a stay.’ ”
Nken v. Holder, 556 U. S. 418, 434 (2009). So the idea that
the Government actually need not satisfy the irreparable-
harm burdens that other stay applicants have, nor wait for
the courts to decide the merits of challenges to its allegedly
unlawful conduct—as other litigants must—is not costless.
   To accept this line of argument sends a troubling mes-
sage: that this Court will allow departures from our stated
legal standards and the basic norms of our judicial system
(such as respect for lower court rulings and equal justice
under law) for certain litigants. It says, in essence, that
although other stay applicants must point to more than the
annoyance of compliance with lower court orders they don’t
like, the Government can approach the courtroom bar with
nothing more than that and obtain relief from this Court
nevertheless. It is particularly startling to think that


——————
  * In its reply brief, the Government glibly contends that it is harmed
by the injunction’s effect on the Government’s work. Reply in Support of
Application for Stay 13–14 (accusing the courts of “micromanaging” the
Executive Branch and imposing “inefficient” restrictions). Those kinds
of generalized complaints are mere descriptors of what it means to be
constrained by law. As such, they are manifestly insufficient to demon-
strate concrete harm.
10                     SSA v. AFSCME

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

grants of relief in these circumstances might be (uninten-
tionally) conveying not only preferential treatment for the
Government but also a willingness to undercut both our
lower court colleagues’ well-reasoned interim judgments
and the well-established constraints of law that they are in
the process of enforcing.
                         *     *     *
   The lower courts are hard at work, expeditiously as-
sessing whether federal law permits the SSA to give DOGE
staffers unfettered access to Americans’ sensitive infor-
mation. The only question before us today is what should
happen to all of that data in the meantime. Two lower
courts have said that DOGE staffers should have to comply
with temporary safeguards on data access while the litiga-
tion is proceeding. Meanwhile, here, the Government has
plainly failed to meet the moment, as it has not shown that
it will suffer any concrete or irreparable harm unless this
Court immediately intervenes.
   But, today, the Court grants a stay permitting the Gov-
ernment to give unfettered data access to DOGE regard-
less—despite its failure to show any need or any interest in
complying with existing privacy safeguards, and all before
we know for sure whether federal law countenances such
access. The Court is thereby, unfortunately, suggesting
that what would be an extraordinary request for everyone
else is nothing more than an ordinary day on the docket for
this Administration. I would proceed without fear or favor
to require DOGE and the Government to do what all other
litigants must do to secure a stay from this Court: comply
with lower court orders constraining their behavior unless
and until they establish that irreparable harm will result
such that equity requires a different course. The Court opts
instead to relieve the Government of the standard obliga-
tions, jettisoning careful judicial decisionmaking and creat-
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

ing grave privacy risks for millions of Americans in the pro-
cess.