(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

     MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI, ATTORNEY
                  GENERAL

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                 THE TENTH CIRCUIT

   No. 23–929.      Argued November 12, 2024—Decided April 22, 2025


The federal government initiated removal proceedings against petitioner
  Monsalvo Velázquez, who asked the government to suspend its re-
  moval efforts or, alternatively, to permit him to leave the United States
  voluntarily. The immigration judge concluded Monsalvo was remova-
  ble but granted him an opportunity to voluntarily depart within 60
  days. After the Board of Immigration Appeals rejected his appeal, it
  granted Monsalvo a new 60-day voluntary departure period. The 60th
  day fell on Saturday, December 11, 2021. Monsalvo filed a motion to
  reopen proceedings on Monday, December 13. The Board rejected that
  motion, concluding that the voluntary departure period had expired on
  Saturday, and Monsalvo’s motion was therefore too late. Monsalvo
  asked the Board to reconsider that conclusion, but the Board refused.
  Monsalvo then petitioned for judicial review in the Tenth Circuit. The
  Tenth Circuit agreed with the Board, holding that the voluntary de-
  parture deadline in 8 U. S. C. §1229c(b)(2) refers to calendar days with
  no extension for deadlines that fall on weekends or holidays.
Held:
    1. This Court has jurisdiction to review Monsalvo’s petition. Under
 §1252, courts may review “final order[s] of removal” and “all questions
 of law” arising from them. Monsalvo’s petition sought judicial review
 of a legal question about the meaning of a term in his final removal
 order—specifically, the meaning of “60 days” for voluntary departure.
 Although Monsalvo did not challenge his removability, nothing in
 §1252 requires an individual to press a challenge to one term in a final
 order of removal just to secure judicial review of another. This Court
2                  MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                                  Syllabus

    rejects the government’s argument that a petition must include a chal-
    lenge to removability to secure judicial review. Such an interpretation
    would force litigants to assert meritless claims simply to obtain juris-
    diction. Pp. 6–11.
       2. Under §1229c(b)(2), a voluntary-departure deadline that falls on
    a weekend or legal holiday extends to the next business day. The
    Board and the Tenth Circuit understood “days” to bear the ordinary
    meaning of calendar days, no more or less. But evidence suggests a
    specialized meaning in legal settings where the term “days” is often
    understood to extend deadlines falling on a weekend or legal holiday
    to the next business day. When Congress adopts a new law against
    the backdrop of a “longstanding administrative construction,” the
    Court generally presumes the new provision works in harmony with
    what came before. Haig v. Agee, 453 U. S. 280, 297–298. Since at least
    the 1950s, immigration regulations have provided that when calculat-
    ing deadlines, the term “day” carries its specialized meaning by exclud-
    ing Sundays and legal holidays (and later Saturdays) if a deadline
    would otherwise fall on one of those days. Congress enacted
    §1229c(b)(2) as part of §304 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Im-
    migrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA) against this consistent
    regulatory backdrop. The government concedes that other deadlines
    in the same section of IIRIRA, such as deadlines for motions to reopen
    or reconsider, are subject to this rule. The identical term “days” should
    be given the same meaning throughout §304, especially when the pro-
    visions were enacted at the same time in the same section of the law.
       Three principal counterarguments are insufficient to overcome the
    presumption that §1229c(b)(2) follows the government’s own
    longstanding practice of extending deadlines falling on a weekend or
    legal holiday to the next business day. First, the fact that the regula-
    tory definition of “day” applies directly only to regulatory deadlines
    and not to statutory deadlines like the one found in §1229c(b)(2) is ir-
    relevant. The question here is not whether a regulation can trump a
    statute but whether Congress’s work in §304 of IIRIRA should be read
    in light of the government’s longstanding regulatory practice. Second,
    the argument that Congress intended different treatment for volun-
    tary departure because it selected 60 days rather than adopting a pre-
    existing regulatory deadline of 90 or 30 days is unpersuasive, as noth-
    ing in §304 hints that deadlines should operate differently, and the
    government itself did not advance this view when promulgating rules
    to enforce the deadline. Third, nothing in the text supports the gov-
    ernment’s proposed distinction between “procedural” and “substan-
    tive” deadlines, as §304 does not draw such lines, nor does the regula-
    tory background suggest this distinction. Pp. 11–18.
88 F. 4th 1301, reversed and remanded.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                   3

                               Syllabus

   GORSUCH, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, and JACKSON, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined, and in which KA-
VANAUGH and BARRETT, JJ., joined as to Parts I and II. ALITO, J., and
BARRETT, J., filed dissenting opinions, in which KAVANAUGH, J., joined.
                        Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 23–929
                                   _________________


HUGO ABISAÍ MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ, PETITIONER
    v. PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                                 [April 22, 2025]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH delivered the opinion of the Court.
   This case poses a question about how to calculate a dead-
line. Often, the government may detain and deport an in-
dividual after properly determining he is unlawfully pre-
sent in this country. But, under 8 U. S. C. §1229c(b)(2), the
government will sometimes delay detention and deporta-
tion for up to “60 days” to allow those of “good moral char-
acter” to leave the country on their own terms. When it
comes to many other deadlines in immigration law, if the
final day permitted for taking an action falls on a weekend
or legal holiday, the deadline rolls over to the next business
day. The question for us is whether §1229c(b)(2)’s 60-day
voluntary-departure deadline works that same way.
                            I
                            A
  Born in Mexico, Hugo Monsalvo Velázquez entered the
United States unlawfully as a teenager about 20 years ago.
Since then, he has made his life in Colorado. Pet. for Cert.
15. There, he attended high school, some college, and met
and married his wife. Ibid. The couple has an 11-year-old
son and a 10-year-old daughter, both U. S. citizens. Ibid.
2             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     Opinion of the Court

Mr. Monsalvo and his wife have raised their family in a
home they own outside Denver, where he also owns and op-
erates a small business. Ibid.
   In 2011, the federal government initiated proceedings to
remove Mr. Monsalvo from the country. Velazquez v. Gar-
land, 88 F. 4th 1301, 1303 (CA10 2023). In response, Mr.
Monsalvo did not dispute that he had entered the country
unlawfully, but he asked the government to suspend its re-
moval efforts because he would face persecution if returned
to Mexico. App. to Pet. for Cert. 44a–50a. Alternatively, he
sought permission to leave the country voluntarily. Id., at
50a.
   That second request was important to him. As a rule,
individuals lawfully determined to be deportable from this
country are not entitled to leave on their own terms but in-
stead face detention and forcible removal. See Dada v.
Mukasey, 554 U. S. 1, 11 (2008). In certain circumstances,
however, the government can afford the option of a “volun-
tary departure” to those “of good moral character.”
§1229c(b)(1)(B). When the government extends this option,
it effectively makes detention and removal contingent: Of-
ficials may detain and remove the individual only if he re-
mains in the country after his voluntary-departure period
has expired. Suspending removal in this way can benefit
both the government and the individual. For the govern-
ment, an individual’s voluntary departure saves the cost
and effort associated with detention and removal. Id., at
11. For the individual, it not only allows him to choose how
and when he leaves the country. It also allows him to avoid
substantial penalties associated with a forcible removal.
Id., at 11–12 (citing §1182(a)(9)(A)).
   In 2019, an immigration judge issued a decision in Mr.
Monsalvo’s case. The judge rejected his claim that he would
face persecution if returned to Mexico. But the judge also
found Mr. Monsalvo eligible for voluntary departure and
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)              3

                      Opinion of the Court

gave him 60 days to leave the country, the maximum al-
lowed by law. App. to Pet. for Cert. 51a. As it happened,
the end of that 60-day period fell on a Saturday. So, the
judge specified, Mr. Monsalvo’s deadline for departing vol-
untarily would extend to the following Monday. Id., at 70a.
Should he fail to leave within that period, the immigration
judge further ordered, Mr. Monsalvo would face removal
and the penalties associated with it. Id., at 51a.
   Mr. Monsalvo responded by appealing to the Board of Im-
migration Appeals. By regulation, that appeal stayed the
immigration judge’s order. See 8 CFR §1003.6 (2019);
Dada, 554 U. S., at 10. On October 12, 2021, the Board is-
sued its own decision. In it, the Board rejected Mr.
Monsalvo’s argument that he would face persecution in
Mexico and gave him a (new) period of “60 days to voluntar-
ily depart” the United States, “the maximum period allowed
by” §1229c(b)(2). App. to Pet. for Cert. 40a. If he “fail[ed]
to voluntarily depart” within that period, the Board added,
he “shall be removed.” Id., at 42a. Summing up, the Board
explained its disposition this way:
      “ORDER: The respondent’s appeal is dismissed.
      “FURTHER ORDER: . . . the respondent(s) is (are)
    permitted to voluntarily depart . . . within 60 days . . . .
    In the event a respondent fails to voluntarily depart . . .
    the respondent shall be removed as provided by the Im-
    migration Judge.” Ibid.
  The Board’s decision also included two other salient pro-
visions. In one, the Board warned Mr. Monsalvo that he
would face serious penalties if he overstayed his voluntary-
departure deadline. Those penalties could include not just
removal and monetary fines, but also ineligibility for most
forms of immigration relief for a period of 10 years. Id., at
42a–43a; 8 U. S. C. §1229c(d)(1). In the other provision, the
Board advised Mr. Monsalvo of his right to file a motion to
reopen his removal proceedings if he thought he had new
4             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     Opinion of the Court

and previously unavailable evidence that could alter the
Board’s assessment of his case. App. to Pet. for Cert. 43a.
If he filed such a motion before the expiration of his 60-day
voluntary-departure period, the Board continued, the pen-
alties associated with failing to depart would “not apply.”
Ibid.; 8 CFR §1240.26(b)(3)(iii) (2021).
                               B
   Consistent with the Board’s direction, Mr. Monsalvo filed
a motion to reopen. On Friday, December 10, 2021, his at-
torney served the government with a copy and sent the orig-
inal to the Board using an overnight delivery service. Brief
for Petitioner 12. On the following Monday, December 13,
2021, the Board accepted the motion for filing. Ibid. The
motion drew the Board’s attention to this Court’s then-re-
cent decision in Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155
(2021), and argued that, under its terms, Mr. Monsalvo was
entitled to have his order of removal canceled. Brief for Pe-
titioner 12.
   The Board denied the motion to reopen for two reasons.
First, it held that Niz-Chavez did not justify reopening Mr.
Monsalvo’s removal proceedings. App. to Pet. for Cert. 37a.
Second, and without prompting from the government, the
Board held that his motion to reopen had arrived too late.
Id., at 38a.
   The Board’s second holding rested on an interpretation of
§1229c(b)(2)’s voluntary-departure deadline. The Board be-
gan by observing that it had given Mr. Monsalvo “60 days”
to depart voluntarily, the maximum allowed by
§1229c(b)(2). Interpreting that statute, the Board read its
use of the term “days” to refer to calendar days. Here, that
meant Mr. Monsalvo’s voluntary-departure period began on
October 12, 2021, when the Board issued its removal order,
and expired on Saturday, December 11, 2021. The Board
did not question that Mr. Monsalvo served his motion to re-
open the day before, on Friday, December 10, 2021. But,
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                     Opinion of the Court

the Board stressed, the motion was not filed until the fol-
lowing business day, Monday, December 13, 2021. And, as
the Board saw it, that created a problem. Because Mr.
Monsalvo had neither left the country nor filed a motion to
reopen before the expiration of his voluntary-departure pe-
riod, the Board said, the penalties it had previously warned
Mr. Monsalvo about now applied. See supra, at 2. Accord-
ingly, the Board held, it was powerless to entertain his mo-
tion—or nearly any request for immigration relief he might
wish to pursue for the next decade. App. to Pet. for Cert.
38a (citing §1229c(d)); see also id., at 43a.
   Mr. Monsalvo filed a motion asking the Board to recon-
sider this second holding. Pet. for Cert. 19. His reason for
focusing on it was obvious. Not only did that holding pre-
vent him from seeking to reopen his case; the Board’s rea-
soning had the potential to foreclose for years almost any
avenue of lawful immigration relief he might hope to pur-
sue. Addressing the Board’s holding, Mr. Monsalvo argued
that it misconstrued §1229c(b)(2). As a matter of law, he
submitted, that statute operates to extend any deadline
that falls on a weekend or legal holiday to the next business
day. The immigration judge handling his case had under-
stood §1229c(b)(2) to work just this way. See supra, at 3;
App. to Pet. for Cert. 70a. And under that view of the law,
Mr. Monsalvo contended, his voluntary-departure deadline
did not expire until Monday, December 13, 2021. As a re-
sult, his motion to reopen was timely filed that same day,
and the penalties associated with failing to file a motion to
reopen or to depart voluntarily did not apply. See 88 F. 4th,
at 1305. Ultimately, however, the Board disagreed, stood
by its earlier decision, and denied Mr. Monsalvo’s motion
for reconsideration. Ibid.
                            C
  Having failed before the agency, Mr. Monsalvo turned to
court, petitioning the Tenth Circuit to review the Board’s
6              MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      Opinion of the Court

order denying his motion for reconsideration. §1252(a)(1).
But that effort failed too. Like the Board, the Tenth Circuit
thought that the provision in his final order of removal
granting him “60 days” to depart voluntarily was “[c]onclu-
sively . . . governed by” §1229c(b)(2). Id., at 1308. And, like
the Board, the court read the statute as speaking in terms
of “calendar days.” Id., at 1303. From this, the court rea-
soned, it followed that Mr. Monsalvo’s voluntary-departure
deadline expired on Saturday, December 11, 2021, and his
failure to file a motion to reopen or to depart voluntarily by
that date made it impossible for the Board to entertain ei-
ther his motion or perhaps any other application from him
for years. Id., at 1309–1310.
   We agreed to take up the case because the Tenth Circuit’s
interpretation of §1229c(b)(2) opened a circuit split. 603
U. S. ___ (2024). While the Tenth Circuit has construed the
statute to afford an individual no more than 60 calendar
days to leave the country voluntarily, the Ninth Circuit has
read it to extend a deadline falling on a weekend or legal
holiday to the next business day. See Meza-Vallejos v.
Holder, 669 F. 3d 920 (2012). Who is right on this question
of statutory interpretation matters greatly to people like
Mr. Monsalvo. Not only does it affect the time one may have
to reopen immigration proceedings. As we have seen, it also
affects an individual’s exposure to detention, removal, and
fines, and carries with it serious ramifications for his ability
to seek lawful status for years into the future.
§§1229c(d)(1), 1182(a)(9); 8 CFR §1240.26(a).
                             II
  Before we can address that question, however, we must
attend to an antecedent one. In the Tenth Circuit, the gov-
ernment argued that court lacked statutory jurisdiction to
entertain Mr. Monsalvo’s petition. Here, the government
renews its claim. On its view, we cannot pass on who has
the better reading of §1229c(b)(2), but must instead vacate
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             7

                      Opinion of the Court

the Tenth Circuit’s judgment and remand Mr. Monsalvo’s
petition to that court with instructions to dismiss it. See
Brief for Respondent 15–20.
                              A
   The Tenth Circuit’s jurisdiction hinged on §1252(a)(1).
That provision allows an individual to petition for “[j]udicial
review of a final order of removal” in the appropriate court
of appeals. Ibid. Such a petition supplies the exclusive
means for obtaining “[j]udicial review of all questions of law
and fact . . . arising from any action taken or proceeding
brought to remove an alien from the United States.”
§1252(b)(9).
   The Tenth Circuit held that it had statutory jurisdiction
to consider Mr. Monsalvo’s petition, and we agree. On Oc-
tober 12, 2021, the Board issued an order which petitioner
contends, and the government does not dispute, constituted
a final order of removal. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 42a–43a;
Reply Brief 5; Tr. of Oral Arg. 37–38, 64–65. That order
conditionally authorized Mr. Monsalvo’s detention and re-
moval, providing that “[i]n the event” he failed to leave vol-
untarily “within 60 days,” the “maximum permitted period
allowed by” §1229c(b)(2), authorities could detain and “re-
mov[e]” him. App. to Pet. for Cert. 40a, 42a; supra, at 3. In
later administrative proceedings, the parties disagreed
about what that order meant. The government read
§1229c(b)(2), and thus the order, as affording Mr. Monsalvo
60 calendar days before authorities could detain and re-
move him—and thus before his time to file a motion to reo-
pen effectively expired. Mr. Monsalvo interpreted the stat-
ute, and thus his order, to extend his 60-day deadline,
which fell on a weekend, to the next business day. Mr.
Monsalvo’s petition to the Tenth Circuit asked that court to
resolve the parties’ dispute. Or, to put it in §1252’s terms,
he asked the court to review his “final order of removal” and
8             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      Opinion of the Court

address a “questio[n] of law . . . arising from” its terms. Ex-
actly as the law allows.
  It is true that Mr. Monsalvo did not seek judicial review
immediately after the Board entered its final order of re-
moval. But, at that stage, he had no reason to do so. The
Board had given him “60 days” to leave the country, and the
immigration judge had already explained to him that a vol-
untary-departure deadline falling on a weekend rolls over
to the next business day. Supra, at 2, 3. The dispute over
the meaning of “60 days” arose only later, when, in ruling
on his motion to reopen and without prompting from the
government, the Board held that his voluntary-departure
deadline expired on a Saturday. See supra, at 4; App. to
Pet. for Cert. 38a. Understandably, Mr. Monsalvo asked
the Board to reconsider that conclusion before he proceeded
to court, giving the agency in the first instance the chance
to address his argument that the phrase “60 days” in
§1229c(b)(2) and his order of removal extends a deadline
falling on a weekend or legal holiday to the next business
day. See supra, at 4. It was only after the Board rejected
that view that he required judicial intervention. And noth-
ing prevented him from seeking it in a challenge to the
Board’s reconsideration order, for that order expressly in-
terpreted a term in his final order of removal and Mr.
Monsalvo’s judicial petition contested that interpretation
as a matter of law.
                            B
  The government does not dispute that Mr. Monsalvo pre-
sented the Tenth Circuit with a legal question about how
long he had to depart before facing removal. See Brief for
Respondent 18–20.        But, the government insists,
§1252(a)(1) requires more. To secure judicial review, the
government says, an individual must include in his petition
some challenge to his “removability” from this country.
Ibid. And because Mr. Monsalvo’s petition didn’t do that,
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                     Opinion of the Court

but pressed only a question about his voluntary-departure
deadline, the court was powerless to hear his case.
   To be sure, the government emphasizes, things could
have worked out differently for Mr. Monsalvo. All he had
to do, the government says, was bundle his question about
the operation of his voluntary-departure deadline with
some challenge to the Board’s conclusion that he was re-
movable. Id., at 20. So, for example, in addition to asking
the Tenth Circuit to review the Board’s order denying his
motion for reconsideration (and rejecting his interpretation
of §1229c(b)(2)), he could have asked for review of the
Board’s order denying his motion to reopen (and concluding
he was not entitled to have his removal canceled). Had he
done that, the government assures us, the Tenth Circuit
would have had jurisdiction over his petition and could have
addressed both questions. Id., at 20.
   The government does not deny that, under its view, some
people will have to “make up a completely meritless claim
in order to get jurisdiction.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 57–58. By the
conclusion of administrative proceedings, individuals like
Mr. Monsalvo may no longer think they have a viable chal-
lenge to their removability, only some other colorable and
consequential question about their final orders of removal.
But, as the government sees it, they cannot simply bring
that live question to court. They must either adorn their
judicial petitions with a pointless challenge to their remov-
ability or forfeit the right to review altogether.
   We see nothing in §1252 that puts litigants to that kind
of choice. The statute does not say that an individual must
press a challenge to one term in a final order of removal (a
finding of “removability”) just to secure judicial review of
another (like a voluntary-departure deadline). In fact, the
word “removability” does not even appear in the statute.
Instead, §1252 authorizes courts to review “final order[s] of
removal” and address “questions of law . . . arising from”
10            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      Opinion of the Court

them. §§1252(a)(1), (b)(9). And pretty plainly, that lan-
guage permits a court to review all terms in a final order of
removal without anything like the qualification the govern-
ment imagines.
    Our dissenting colleagues see things differently. In their
view, this Court’s decision in Nasrallah v. Barr, 590 U. S.
573 (2020), requires us to adopt the government’s jurisdic-
tional theory. See post, at 8–10 (opinion of THOMAS, J.);
post, at 2 (opinion of BARRETT, J.). But, if anything, that
case supports our conclusion. Nasrallah described a “final
order of removal” subject to judicial review as a final order
“ ‘concluding that the alien is deportable or ordering depor-
tation.’ ” 590 U. S., at 581. And (again) that is exactly what
we have here: a final order specifying that the government
may remove Mr. Monsalvo if he fails to depart voluntarily
within 60 days, and a petition asking the courts to settle a
dispute over what that order means.
    JUSTICE THOMAS highlights Nasrallah’s holding that a
Board order denying relief under the Convention Against
Torture (CAT) in that case was “not part of the removal or-
der.” Post, at 9 (dissenting opinion). But we fail to see the
relevance of that holding to this case. A CAT order provides
that, “notwithstanding” a removal order, the government
may not remove an individual to a particular “designated
country.” Nasrallah, 590 U. S., at 582. CAT orders, more-
over, have a distinct statutory basis from removal orders,
and different statutes govern their review. Id., at 579–580.
No such order is in play here. Mr. Monsalvo has not sought
judicial review of a CAT order, only review about the mean-
ing of his final order of removal.
    JUSTICE BARRETT, for her part, reads Nasrallah as sug-
gesting that an individual like Mr. Monsalvo may not chal-
lenge the Board’s interpretation of a term in his removal
order. Instead, he may ask a court only to change or excise
a term in his removal order. See post, at 2 (dissenting opin-
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    11

                          Opinion of the Court

ion). But Nasrallah held nothing of the kind. Nor is it pos-
sible to square such a view with the statutory text. Section
1252 permits individuals to petition for judicial review of
“final orders of removal” and indicates that those petitions
supply the exclusive means for securing “[j]udicial review of
all questions of law.” §1252(b)(9). Nothing in the statutory
text contains anything like the limitation the dissent sup-
poses, permitting judicial review of only certain kinds of le-
gal errors.1
                              III
                               A
   That takes us to the merits. The Board’s final order of
removal permitted the government to detain and remove
Mr. Monsalvo if he failed to leave the country within “60
days . . . the maximum period allowed by” §1229c(b)(2).
App. to Pet. for Cert. 40a. Everyone agrees the proper con-
struction of that order is “governed by” the proper construc-
tion of §1229c(b)(2). 88 F. 4th, at 1308. Like Mr. Monsalvo’s
final order of removal, that statute sets forth a deadline ex-
pressed in terms of a number of “days.” See §1229c(b)(2)
——————
   1 Separately, the dissents suggest that we should remand this case to

the Tenth Circuit to address the government’s “late-breaking” jurisdic-
tional objection. Post, at 6 (opinion of THOMAS, J.); see also post, at 3
(opinion of BARRETT, J.). But the government’s objection is not a new
one—it has challenged statutory jurisdiction throughout the life of this
litigation, even if it has pursued various and shifting theories to support
its objection. See Brief for Respondent in No. 22–9576 (CA10), pp. 36–
38; Brief for Respondent 15–20. Nor do the dissenters dispute that this
Court may “dispose of . . . recently raised jurisdictional argument[s].”
Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Ltd. v. Novo Nordisk A/S, 566
U. S. 399, 412, n. 5 (2012).
   Separately still, JUSTICE THOMAS suggests that we have developed an
argument for jurisdiction that Mr. Monsalvo did not present. See post,
at 13 (dissenting opinion). That charge is mistaken. Our analysis here
tracks Mr. Monsalvo’s contention that his case satisfies §1252 because
he sought judicial review of the Board’s “resolution of the disputed time-
liness issue,” which turned on the “terms of [his] final removal order.”
Reply Brief 4–5.
12            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     Opinion of the Court

(“Permission to depart voluntarily under this subsection
shall not be valid for a period exceeding 60 days”). But what
does that mean: Does every calendar day count? Or does
the statute operate to extend a deadline that falls on a
weekend or legal holiday to the next business day?
  In truth, the statute is susceptible to both understand-
ings. An ordinary reader might understand “days” to mean
calendar days, no more or less. That is how the Board and
the Tenth Circuit saw it. See supra, at 4–5. And, to be sure,
we usually assume statutory terms bear their ordinary
meaning “until and unless someone points to evidence sug-
gesting otherwise.” Niz-Chavez, 593 U. S., at 163. But
here, evidence suggesting the possibility of specialized
meaning does exist. In legal settings, the term “days” is
often understood to extend deadlines falling on a weekend
or legal holiday to the next business day. Various federal
rules reflect this understanding. See, e.g., Fed. Rule Civ.
Proc. 6(a)(1)(C). As do our own. See this Court’s Rule 30(1).
The Ninth Circuit and the immigration judge in this case
thought §1229c(b)(2) of a piece with that practice. See su-
pra, at 2, 5. The question before us thus boils down to
whether §1229c(b)(2) uses the term “days” in its ordinary or
specialized sense.
  To resolve that question, we turn to one of this Court’s
customary interpretive tools. When Congress adopts a new
law against the backdrop of a “longstanding administrative
construction,” this Court generally presumes the new pro-
vision should be understood to work in harmony with what
has come before. Haig v. Agee, 453 U. S. 280, 297–298
(1981); accord, United States v. Hill, 506 U. S. 546, 553–554
(1993); FDIC v. Philadelphia Gear Corp., 476 U. S. 426, 437
(1986).
  That presumption is all but dispositive here. For many
years, Congress has authorized the executive branch to
draw up regulations to enforce the immigration laws. See
8 U. S. C. §1103(a)(3). And since at least the 1950s, those
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    13

                          Opinion of the Court

regulations have provided that, when calculating the dead-
line for the “taking of any action,” the term “day” carries its
specialized meaning by excluding Sundays and legal holi-
days if a deadline would otherwise fall on one of those days.
8 CFR §1.1(a)(6) (1958) (emphasis added). In all the years
since, the only notable change to this rule has been the ad-
dition of Saturdays to the list of excluded days. 52 Fed. Reg.
2935 (1987). Congress adopted §1229c(b)(2) against the
backdrop of this consistent, longstanding administrative
construction. And, given that, we presume the statute em-
ploys the same understanding.2
   Nor do we see anything in the statute that might over-
come our usual presumption. To the contrary, what evi-
dence we have before us only supports its application. Con-
gress set forth the maximum number of “days” allowed for
voluntary departure in §304 of the Illegal Immigration Re-
form and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA).
In the same section of that law, Congress also provided in-
dividuals a certain number of “days” to file motions to reo-
pen or to reconsider. §304, 110 Stat. 3009–593; 8 U. S. C.
§§1229a(c)(6)(B), (c)(7)(C)(i). When it comes to those latter
provisions, the government concedes, the term “days” is
best read in light of pre-existing regulatory practice and
thus takes its specialized meaning. Brief for Respondent
43–44. Everyone agrees, then, that two provisions in §304
operate to roll a deadline falling on a weekend or legal hol-
iday over to the next business day. And if two provisions in
a single section of an Act of Congress use the term “days”
this way, it is all the more sensible to think a third provision
in the same section does as well. After all, “identical words
and phrases within the same statute should normally be
given the same meaning.” Powerex Corp. v. Reliant Energy
——————
  2 Though §1229c(b)(2) uses the plural “days,” and the regulation uses

the singular “day,” no one before us has suggested that distinction makes
a difference. Cf. 1 U. S. C. §1 (“[W]ords importing the plural include the
singular,” and vice versa).
14               MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                           Opinion of the Court

Services, Inc., 551 U. S. 224, 232 (2007). And, if anything,
that maxim may be “doubly appropriate” where, as here,
Congress employed the same term in multiple places “at the
same time” in the “same section of the [same] public law.”
Id., at 231–232.
  Tellingly, too, if Congress meant to depart from settled
immigration practice when it adopted the voluntary-depar-
ture deadline in 1996, the government itself seems not to
have noticed. After Congress enacted IIRIRA, the govern-
ment promulgated a new rule to enforce §1229c(b)(2)’s
terms. See 62 Fed. Reg. 10312, 10372 (1997). Tracking the
statute, that rule allows an immigration judge to grant a
voluntary-departure period of up to “60 days.” 8 CFR
§240.26(e) (1999). And under the government’s own regu-
lations, remember, regulatory deadlines defined in terms of
days do not expire on weekends or legal holidays.
§1001.1(h) (2021). Nowhere does the government’s rule en-
forcing §1229c(b)(2) suggest that it is exempt from these
regulations.3 Perhaps for this reason, the immigration
judge in Mr. Monsalvo’s own case understood his voluntary-
departure deadline to extend past a weekend to a Monday.
See supra, at 3. Perhaps for this reason, as well, many
other immigration judges have done the same in other
cases. See Brief for American Immigration Lawyers Asso-
ciation as Amicus Curiae 4 (collecting examples).
                               B
     In response to our merits analysis, the government and
——————
   3 JUSTICE ALITO notes that the government’s rule provides that “ ‘the

total period of time [to voluntarily depart shall not exceed] 60 days as set
forth in section 240B of the Act.’ ” Post, at 10, n. 3 (dissenting opinion)
(quoting 8 CFR §1240.26(f ) (2024)). But we fail to see how the language
he emphasizes moves the needle. As we have seen, the relevant section
of the Act does not define “days.” Meanwhile, the government’s own rules
instruct that regulatory deadlines like this one should be construed con-
sistent with the specialized meaning of the term “day.” Nor does any-
thing in this regulation disavow that approach.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                          Opinion of the Court

JUSTICE ALITO offer three principal counterarguments.
But, thoughtful as they are, we find none sufficient to over-
come the presumption that §1229c(b)(2) follows the govern-
ment’s own longstanding practice.
   First, the government and JUSTICE ALITO stress the lim-
ited reach of the regulation defining the term “day.” Yes,
they admit, that rule has long indicated that deadlines ex-
pressed in days do not expire on weekends or legal holidays.
And yes, they agree, the definition applies for “computing
the period of time for taking any action provided in this
chapter.” 8 CFR §1.1(h) (1996) (emphasis added). But, they
observe, that rule applies only to regulatory deadlines and
does not purport to control statutory deadlines like the one
found in §1229c(b)(2). Brief for Respondent 43; post, at 4
(dissenting opinion).
   That much is true, but also irrelevant. The question be-
fore us isn’t whether a regulation can trump a statute (of
course not). It is whether Congress’s work in §304 of
IIRIRA should be read in light of the government’s
longstanding regulatory practice. And, again, even the gov-
ernment concedes that the answer is (mostly) yes. Supra,
at 12. When speaking of the “days” available for filing mo-
tions to reopen or to reconsider in §304, the government ad-
mits, Congress meant to follow the pre-existing regulatory
practice rolling over deadlines falling on weekends and le-
gal holidays to the next business day. Brief for Respondent
43–44. Nothing in the government’s argument here sup-
plies a reason to suppose Congress meant the term “days”
to work differently when it comes to the voluntary-depar-
ture deadline found in the same section of IIRIRA.4
——————
   4 JUSTICE ALITO questions our reliance on the government’s concession

that the specialized meaning of “days” applies to other deadlines in §304
of IIRIRA. See post, at 7–8 (dissenting opinion). But our colleague does
not dispute the correctness of that concession and, in the end, seems to
embrace it. See post, at 6, 9 (endorsing the specialized meaning of “days”
for §304’s “filing” deadlines).
16            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      Opinion of the Court

  Second, and attempting to address this deficiency, the
government and JUSTICE ALITO highlight the fact that,
when setting the deadlines for motions to reopen or to re-
consider in §304, Congress codified pre-existing deadlines
found in immigration regulations (90 days and 30 days, re-
spectively). By contrast, when Congress selected 60 days
as the voluntary-departure deadline, it did not pull that
number from a pre-existing regulatory deadline. Given
that difference, the argument goes, Congress must have
meant the word “days” to work differently when it comes to
the voluntary-departure deadline alone. Brief for Respond-
ent 43–44; post, at 9–10 (dissenting opinion).
  That conclusion, however, does not follow from its prem-
ise. Exactly nothing in §304 hints that deadlines found
there should operate differently. Nor does the regulatory
backdrop against which Congress legislated. Recall that,
by 1996, the government’s regulations had long provided—
categorically and without exception—that the term “day”
excludes certain weekends and legal holidays when it comes
to calculating the deadline for “taking any action,” of what-
ever kind, required by regulation. 8 CFR §1001.1(h) (em-
phasis added). Again, too, if Congress meant to pursue a
more parsimonious approach for the voluntary-departure
deadline in §304, it is curious that the government itself did
not seem to advance that view when it promulgated its own
rule to enforce that deadline. See 8 CFR §1240.26(e); supra,
at 14, and n. 3.
  Third, coming at the problem from a different direction,
the government and JUSTICE ALITO suggest that we should
divide §304’s deadlines into “procedural” and “substantive”
categories. Brief for Respondent 15, 22; post, at 4, 6, 9 (dis-
senting opinion). For “procedural” deadlines, like those for
motions to reopen and reconsider, the government and dis-
sent concede, it makes sense to think Congress legislated
against the administrative backdrop we have described,
given that the agencies and courts where those motions
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            17

                      Opinion of the Court

must be filed are usually closed on weekends and legal hol-
idays. But that consideration is immaterial, the govern-
ment and JUSTICE ALITO insist, for the “substantive” duty
of voluntary departure. After all, an individual can leave
the country almost anytime; even if agencies and courts
close for the weekend or a legal holiday, airports and roads
generally remain open.
   Maybe the procedural/substantive distinction the govern-
ment and dissent propose would make for good policy. But
if Congress had something like that in mind, it never said
so. Section 304’s text does not draw any lines between pro-
cedural and substantive duties. Nor does the regulatory
background against which the statute was adopted hint at
such a distinction. As we have seen, the government’s
longstanding definition of the term “day” excludes certain
weekends and holidays when calculating the time for tak-
ing “any action” under immigration regulations—including
when it comes to various “substantive” actions that can
plainly be accomplished on a weekend or holiday, like “get-
ting married after entering the United States on a fiancé(e)
visa.” Brief for Petitioner 38. Notably, as well, the govern-
ment’s own regulations enforcing §304 make no mention of
a procedural/substantive distinction either. Supra, at 11–
12.
   Perhaps, too, Congress had good reason for eschewing the
line the government and dissent would have us draw. Often
enough, as it happens, a “substantive” duty that can be per-
formed on any given day will be intertwined with a “proce-
dural” duty that can be discharged only on days when agen-
cies and courts are open. Mr. Monsalvo’s case reflects this
reality. In it, the effective (procedural) deadline for his mo-
tion to reopen turned on the calculation of the (substantive)
deadline for voluntary departure. See supra, at 4. In light
of that reality, a rational Congress might have thought it
sensible to extend the same rule to both the procedural and
substantive deadlines in §304. Of course, whether anyone
18               MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                          Opinion of the Court

in Congress gave so much as a passing thought to questions
like that is anyone’s guess. But one thing is certain: The
statutory text Congress chose in §1229c(b)(2) shows no
more sign of a procedural/substantive distinction than the
government’s own longstanding rules.5
                             *
   As we see it, §1229c(b)(2)’s deadline works like others
found in §304 of IIRIRA—and so many others in immigra-
tion law. Here, as elsewhere, the term “days” operates to
extend a deadline that falls on a weekend or legal holiday
to the next business day. Because the Tenth Circuit held
otherwise in addressing Mr. Monsalvo’s petition, its judg-
ment is reversed, and the case is remanded for further pro-
ceedings consistent with this opinion.

                                                       It is so ordered.




——————
   5 Briefly advancing a separate argument that the government has not

advanced for itself, JUSTICE ALITO suggests that the specialized meaning
of “days” cannot be applied sensibly to other deadlines governing, for ex-
ample, how long an “alien crewman” may remain in this country. Post,
at 5–6 (dissenting opinion (discussing 8 U. S. C. §1282(a)). But, as we
have sought to stress, different statutes passed at different times against
different regulatory backdrops may bear different meanings, and all we
address today is the meaning of §1229c(b)(2).
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 23–929
                         _________________


HUGO ABISAÍ MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ, PETITIONER
    v. PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                        [April 22, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins, and
with whom JUSTICE KAVANAUGH and JUSTICE BARRETT
join as to Parts I and II, dissenting.
   This Court granted certiorari to decide whether the dead-
line for a removable alien to voluntarily depart the United
States extends to the next business day if it would other-
wise fall on a weekend or public holiday. See 8 U. S. C.
§1229c(b)(2). But, the merits-stage briefing revealed a se-
rious, novel jurisdictional objection that may bar our re-
view. Given that complication, we should have vacated and
remanded for the Tenth Circuit’s consideration in the first
instance. Instead, the majority reaches the merits after
finding jurisdiction based on a flawed theory of its own cre-
ation. I respectfully dissent.
                               I
   The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 66 Stat. 163,
8 U. S. C. §1101 et seq., “governs how persons are admitted
to, and removed from, the United States.” Pereida v. Wil-
kinson, 592 U. S. 224, 227 (2021). In 1996, Congress en-
acted “comprehensive amendments” to the INA through the
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility
Act (IIRIRA), 110 Stat. 3009–546. INS v. St. Cyr, 533 U. S.
289, 292 (2001). This case concerns two of IIRIRA’s re-
2             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

forms: its imposition of strict deadlines for voluntary depar-
ture, and its curtailment of an alien’s right to judicial re-
view.
                              A
   “Voluntary departure” is a discretionary form of immigra-
tion relief under which “certain favored aliens” can “leave
the country willingly,” in lieu of deportation. Dada v.
Mukasey, 554 U. S. 1, 8 (2008). This relief strikes a bargain
between the Government and eligible aliens. The Govern-
ment saves time and money by shifting the costs of depar-
ture onto the alien. In exchange, the alien retains some
control over the timing and destination of his departure and
escapes the penalties that follow formal deportation. Ante,
at 2.
   IIRIRA tightened this bargain by “curtail[ing] the period
of time during which an alien may remain in the United
States pending voluntary departure.” Dada, 554 U. S., at
9. Gone are the days when aliens permitted to voluntarily
depart could “ ‘continue their illegal presence in the United
States for months, and even years.’” Ibid. Now, a voluntary-
departure period granted at the end of an alien’s removal
proceedings cannot “excee[d] 60 days.” §1229c(b)(2). Aliens
who fail to timely depart face stringent penalties, including
a 10-year period of ineligibility for various forms of immi-
gration relief. §1229c(d)(1); ante, at 3.
   To enforce the voluntary-departure deadline, the immi-
gration judge (IJ) or Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)
must enter an “alternate order of removal” alongside any
grant of voluntary departure. 8 CFR §§1240.26(d), (k)(1)
(2024). That order goes into effect automatically if an alien
does not depart by the deadline.
   IIRIRA also permits an alien to give up his grant of vol-
untary departure and pursue other administrative relief.
Dada, 554 U. S., at 21. The alien may at any time before
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

his voluntary-departure deadline move to reopen his re-
moval proceedings or move for reconsideration of his case.
§1240.26(e)(1). If the alien acts before the deadline, then
his motion will “automatically terminat[e] the grant of vol-
untary departure” and cause the “alternate order of re-
moval [to] take effect,” but the alien will not be subject to
the penalties for failure to timely depart. §§1240.26(c)
(3)(iii), (e)(1). If the deadline “has already expired,” how-
ever, then a filing “does not in any way impact the period of
time allowed for voluntary departure” or, outside an excep-
tion not relevant here, the penalties for failing to timely de-
part. §1240.26(e)(2).
                               B
   Beyond its substantive constraints, IIRIRA also “insti-
tuted a new” and “significantly more restrictive” scheme for
judicial review. Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination
Comm., 525 U. S. 471, 475 (1999) (AADC). That scheme
makes the “final order of removal” the linchpin of an alien’s
right to judicial review. 8 U. S. C. §1252.
   A final order of removal is “a final order ‘concluding that
the alien is deportable or ordering deportation.’ ” Nasrallah
v. Barr, 590 U. S. 573, 579 (2020) (quoting §1101(a)(47)(A)).
Under §1252, an alien can obtain judicial review of such an
order by filing a petition for review in a federal court of ap-
peals. §1252(a)(1). That section also makes review of “all
questions of law and fact” arising from an alien’s removal
proceedings available “only in judicial review of a final or-
der” of removal, unless there is an independent jurisdic-
tional basis. §1252(b)(9).
   Our precedents have interpreted §1252 to permit judicial
review only of the final order of removal itself and two
closely related categories of orders. First, “rulings that af-
fect the validity of the final order of removal,” such as an
IJ’s evidentiary rulings, “merge into the final order of re-
moval for purposes of judicial review.” Id., at 582. Second,
4             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

certain rulings that have an independent jurisdictional ba-
sis, such as an order regarding Convention Against Torture
(CAT) relief, “may be reviewed together with the final order
of removal.” Id., at 582–583, 585. Beyond these categories,
however, the federal courts lack jurisdiction over removal-
related determinations. See Reyes Mata v. Lynch, 576 U. S.
143, 147 (2015).
                              C
   Petitioner Hugo Monsalvo Velázquez is an alien who was
granted voluntary departure at the end of his removal pro-
ceedings. Before the IJ, he conceded removability but
sought CAT relief or withholding of removal based on an
alleged risk of future persecution. He asked for voluntary
departure in the alternative. The IJ granted only voluntary
departure, while also entering the requisite alternate order
of removal. On appeal, the BIA reset the voluntary-departure
period after it affirmed the IJ’s denial of other relief.
   The BIA set Monsalvo’s new voluntary-departure period
to run for the 60 days following its decision, which issued
on October 12, 2021. Measured by calendar days, a 60-day
period would end on Saturday, December 11, 2021.
   On Friday, December 10, 2021, Monsalvo submitted a
motion to reopen his removal proceedings via overnight de-
livery service. The motion asserted that, following this
Court’s decision in Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155
(2021), Monsalvo was newly eligible for cancellation of re-
moval. Pursuant to a BIA policy not challenged here, this
after-hours motion was not deemed filed until Monday, De-
cember 13, 2021, when the BIA was next open to receive
filings. See BIA Practice Manual §3.1(a)(1), https://www.
justice.gov/eoir/reference-materials/bia.
   The BIA denied Monsalvo’s motion both on the merits of
his Niz-Chavez claim and based on the timing of his filing.
On its view, “[t]he 60-day period of voluntary departure ter-
minated on December 11, 2021.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 38a.
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)               5

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

Because Monsalvo had failed to depart by that deadline, his
December 13 reopening motion came when he was already
subject to IIRIRA’s penalties for failing to timely depart, in-
cluding “ineligibil[ity] for . . . cancellation of removal.” Ibid.
Thus, Monsalvo was ineligible for his requested relief.
   After Monsalvo moved for reconsideration of only the tim-
ing holding, the BIA reaffirmed its position. “[N]o provi-
sion[,] statute[,] or regulation extend[s] the last day of the
voluntary departure period f[a]lling on a weekend or a legal
holiday to the next business day,” it explained, so 60 days
means 60 calendar days. Id., at 34a–35a.
   Monsalvo petitioned the Tenth Circuit for review of the
BIA’s reconsideration ruling. He argued that, when the
voluntary-departure deadline would otherwise fall on a
weekend or holiday, it rolls over to the next business day.
In deciding his petition, the Tenth Circuit first rejected the
Government’s arguments for why it lacked statutory juris-
diction under §1252 to review the petition. On the merits,
the court ruled for the Government, agreeing with the BIA
that 60 days means 60 calendar days.
   We granted certiorari to review the Tenth Circuit’s mer-
its holding. 603 U. S. ___ (2024). But, since then, much of
the briefing—and our focus at oral argument—has centered
on the threshold issue of statutory jurisdiction.
   The Government raised before this Court a new objection
to the Tenth Circuit’s jurisdiction: that Monsalvo’s petition
could not support jurisdiction because it did not bear on his
removability. The Government emphasized that Monsalvo
had asked the Tenth Circuit to review only the denial of his
motion for reconsideration, which, unlike his motion for re-
opening, did not ask the BIA to reopen his removal proceed-
ings. Accordingly, he was asking only “to alter a nondispos-
itive portion of the Board’s reasoning in its prior decision
declining to reopen proceedings.” Brief for Respondent 19.
That unusual request, the Government contended, did not
fall into any category cognizable under §1252.
6                MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                        THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               II
   In view of the Government’s serious, late-breaking juris-
dictional objection, we should have vacated and remanded
for the Tenth Circuit’s review. Although “[o]bjections to a
tribunal’s jurisdiction can be raised at any time,” Sebelius
v. Auburn Regional Medical Center, 568 U. S. 145, 153
(2013), we need not resolve a belated objection ourselves.
   Our “usual practice” is to refrain from deciding “legal . . .
questions in the first instance.” CRST Van Expedited, Inc.
v. EEOC, 578 U. S. 419, 435 (2016). “[W]e are a court of
review, not of first view.” Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S.
709, 718, n. 7 (2005). Accordingly, we ordinarily wait to see
if “the crucible of adversarial testing . . . , along with the
experience of our thoughtful colleagues on the district and
circuit benches, [can] yield insights (or reveal pitfalls) we
cannot muster guided only by our own lights.” Maslenjak
v. United States, 582 U. S. 335, 354 (2017) (GORSUCH, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
   This Court has routinely vacated and remanded cases so
that lower courts can be the first to address significant new
developments. Zubik v. Burwell, 578 U. S. 403, 408–409
(2016) (per curiam) (collecting cases). In a number of cases,
we have taken this course based on emergent jurisdictional
matters specifically. See, e.g., Frank v. Gaos, 586 U. S. 485,
488, 492–493 (2019) (per curiam); Insurance Co. of Pa. v.
Ben Cooper, Inc., 498 U. S. 964 (1990).
   I would do the same here. Not only was the jurisdictional
issue before us not raised below, but until this point it has
not been passed upon by any court. Tr. of Oral Arg. 12, 67.1
   Caution is also especially important for jurisdictional
matters. “Congress’ power over federal jurisdiction is ‘an
——————
  1 The majority cannot sidestep the novelty of the jurisdictional issue

before us by highlighting that the Government raised other objections to
statutory jurisdiction below. Ante, at 11, n. 1. The point remains that
the Government did not raise, and the Tenth Circuit had no opportunity
to consider, the important objection contested before this Court.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

essential ingredient of separation and equilibration of pow-
ers, restraining the courts from acting at certain times, and
even restraining them from acting permanently regarding
certain subjects.’ ” Patchak v. Zinke, 583 U. S. 244, 254
(2018) (plurality opinion) (quoting Steel Co. v. Citizens for
Better Environment, 523 U. S. 83, 101 (1998)). When we
assume jurisdiction too hastily, we risk aggrandizing our-
selves at the expense of the political branches.
  There is no reason for the Court’s intervention today. We
did not grant certiorari to address jurisdiction, and—as its
novel status reflects—the jurisdictional question plainly is
not so pressing as to require immediate resolution. Nor is
the underlying question presented so important as to re-
quire resolution in this case. That question too arises only
rarely: As the Tenth Circuit recognized, its decision below
resolved “an issue of first impression in th[at] court,” which
had been “addressed before by only one other circuit.” Ve-
lazquez v. Garland, 88 F. 4th 1301, 1305 (2023).
  Of course, we should not hesitate to brush aside baseless
jurisdictional objections. But, the issue here cannot be dis-
missed on that ground. The Government has raised a seri-
ous objection based on the tension between §1252’s removal-
focused jurisdictional framework and Monsalvo’s choice to
seek review only of a claim unrelated to removability. We
should not be “the first”—and only—“court in the Nation”
to address that tension. Yee v. Escondido, 503 U. S. 519,
538 (1992).
                               III
   If required to decide the jurisdictional question, however,
I would conclude that the Tenth Circuit lacked jurisdiction
over Monsalvo’s petition. “[T]he party invoking federal ju-
risdiction bears the burden of establishing its existence,”
and, on the admittedly limited briefing before us, Monsalvo
has not met his burden. Steel Co., 523 U. S., at 104. In
contending otherwise, Monsalvo and the majority offer two
8             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

distinct theories of jurisdiction, but neither holds up.
                               A
   The difficulty for Monsalvo stems from his litigation
strategy below. He asked the Tenth Circuit to review only
the BIA’s denial of his reconsideration motion. Supra, at 5.
That motion, in turn, challenged only one of the BIA’s two
bases for denying his reopening motion. Supra, at 4–5.
Monsalvo objected to the BIA’s conclusion that the motion
was untimely, but not its conclusion that it also failed on
the merits. Ibid. In other words, the Government is right
to say that, before the Tenth Circuit, he sought only “to al-
ter a nondispositive portion of the Board’s reasoning” for
denying reopening. Brief for Respondent 19.
   That framing fits poorly with §1252, which ties jurisdic-
tion to a narrow version of the term “final order of removal.”
Before IIRIRA, the predecessor term “final order of depor-
tation” covered “ ‘all determinations made during and inci-
dent to the administrative proceeding’ on removability.”
Nasrallah, 590 U. S., at 584 (quoting Foti v. INS, 375 U. S.
217, 229 (1963)). But, under IIRIRA, a “final order of re-
moval” is only the “final order ‘concluding that the alien is
deportable or ordering deportation.’ ” 590 U. S., at 579
(quoting §1101(a)(47)(A)).
   Nasrallah made clear that a “final order of removal” re-
fers only to the portion of an IJ or BIA decision that finds
or orders removability, not the entirety of that decision. In
that case, we considered whether an alien barred under
§1252(a)(2)(C) from raising a factual challenge to his final
order of removal could still factually challenge the denial of
CAT relief. Id., at 576.
   We began by considering the nature of the CAT denial.
In the underlying BIA decision, that denial immediately
preceded the alien’s removal order:
      “FURTHER ORDER: The Immigration Judge’s order
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                       9

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

     granting the respondent’s application for deferral of re-
     moval under the Convention Against Torture is va-
     cated.
       “FURTHER ORDER: The respondent is ordered re-
     moved from the United States to Lebanon pursuant to
     the Immigration Judge’s August 11, 2016, order.” App.
     to Pet. for Cert. in Nasrallah v. Barr, O. T. 2019, No.
     18–1432, p. 21a.
Still, every Member of this Court recognized that the CAT
denial was a distinct order, and not part of the removal or-
der. 590 U. S., at 582; id., at 591 (THOMAS, J., dissenting).
  The Nasrallah majority then concluded that the distinct
status of a CAT order preserved Nasrallah’s factual chal-
lenge to that order. On its understanding, §1252(a)(2)(C)
constrained only Nasrallah’s ability to challenge his final
order of removal itself, plus any “rulings that affect[ed] the
validity of the final order of removal” and so “merge[d] into
the final order of removal for purposes of judicial review.”
Id., at 582. Because the CAT order fell into neither cate-
gory, and instead had a separate jurisdictional basis,
Nasrallah could still pursue his factual challenge to the
CAT order “together with the final order of removal.” Id.,
at 582–583.2
  Although this conclusion aided Nasrallah, it cuts against
Monsalvo. Unlike a CAT claimant, Monsalvo cannot point
——————
   2 I adhere to my disagreement with Nasrallah’s disposition. See 590

U. S., at 589–591 (dissenting opinion). On my view, the §1252(a)(2)(C)
bar applies to all claims governed by §1252(b)(9)’s “zipper clause.” Ibid.
That clause “consolidates ‘all questions of law and fact . . . arising from
any action taken or proceeding brought to remove an alien’ ” into review
of the final order of removal, where they are equally subject to §1252’s
“limitations on final orders of removal.” Id., at 591–592. “ ‘Arising from’ ”
is a sweeping term, and a CAT order issued during a removal proceeding
falls within its ambit. Id., at 591. Regardless, because this case turns
on jurisdictional categories to which the Nasrallah majority agreed that
the zipper clause applies, my disagreement is of no moment here. See
ibid.
10            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

to any basis for jurisdiction other than §1252(a)(1). To es-
tablish jurisdiction, he must show that his petition before
the Tenth Circuit challenged either the final order of re-
moval itself, as Nasrallah construed it, or at least the va-
lidity of that order. Supra, at 3–4. But, in seeking review
only of a “nondispositive portion of the Board’s reasoning,”
Monsalvo’s petition did neither. Brief for Respondent 19.
   Monsalvo all but conceded below that his petition did not
bear on his final order of removal. As he explained in his
Tenth Circuit briefing, he “was not seeking to ‘vacate the
order of removal against him.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Reply Brief
for Petitioner in No. 22–9576 (CA10), pp. 5–6 (sealed)). He
explained that a ruling that the BIA was wrong about the
date of his voluntary-departure deadline “ ‘would have no
effect whatever’ ” on “ ‘the underlying order of removal.’ ”
Brief for Respondent 19 (quoting Reply Brief for Petitioner
in No. 22–9576 (CA10), at 5; emphasis deleted). Monsalvo
sought only a collateral advantage: If his voluntary-departure
deadline did not expire until December 13, then his motion
to reopen—filed the same day—would have canceled his
grant of voluntary departure without making him subject
to the penalties associated with failing to timely depart,
such as “ineligibility for future immigration relief.” 88
F. 4th, at 1307.
   It thus is not apparent how the Tenth Circuit had juris-
diction to hear Monsalvo’s case. Section 1252 allows review
of a limited range of removal-related matters; it is not a ve-
hicle to head off unwanted postremoval consequences.
                              B
   Monsalvo’s attempt to reconceptualize his challenge is
unpersuasive. He argues before this Court that the penal-
ties for failing to timely depart are not collateral conse-
quences, but terms of his final order of removal. Reply Brief
4. If we recognized that his motion to reopen was filed be-
fore his voluntary-departure deadline, he says, then those
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             11

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

terms would disappear, and the order would transform into
one “without any severe penalties.” Ibid.
   Monsalvo divines this conclusion from the BIA’s original
decision on his removability, in which the BIA affirmed the
IJ’s denial of CAT and withholding relief. Monsalvo reads
that decision to state that, if he failed to timely depart, a
final order of removal with “three distinct terms” would go
into effect: first, that he “ ‘shall be removed’ ”; second, that
he “ ‘shall be subject to a [monetary] penalty’ ”; and third,
that he “ ‘shall be ineligible for a period of 10 years for any
further relief under [certain INA provisions].’ ” Id., at 5
(quoting App. to Pet. for Cert. 42a–43a). “If the Tenth Cir-
cuit had granted the petition for review,” he says, “the re-
sult would have been to delete Clauses 2 and 3” from this
removal order. Reply Brief 5.
   This argument conflicts with Nasrallah. Again, that de-
cision made clear that a final order of removal refers only
to the portion of the IJ’s or BIA’s decision “ ‘concluding that
the alien is deportable or ordering deportation.’ ” 590 U. S.,
at 579 (quoting §1101(a)(47)(A)). Other directives do not
qualify, even if they are imposed concurrently. Thus, just
as we recognized that the CAT order in Nasrallah was not
a final order of removal, id., at 582, an order levying penal-
ties upon Monsalvo for failure to timely depart is also dis-
tinct. In attempting to collapse the latter order into his fi-
nal order of removal, Monsalvo wrongly attempts to revive
the pre-IIRIRA approach. Supra, at 8.
   Moreover, Monsalvo misunderstands the function of the
BIA’s penalty language. That language did not purport to
impose liability on him in the event of his failure to timely
depart. Rather, it carried out the BIA’s statutory obligation
to give him “notice” of the penalties listed in the INA for
untimeliness:
      “NOTICE: If a respondent fails to voluntarily depart
    the United States within the time period specified, or
12             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

     any extensions granted by the DHS, the respondent
     shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided by the reg-
     ulations and the statute, and shall be ineligible for a
     period of 10 years for any further relief under [certain
     INA provisions]. See section 240B(d) of the [INA].”
     App. to Pet. for Cert. 42a–43a (emphasis added).
See also §1229c(d)(3).
   In other words, even if the “notice” paragraph could be
considered part of his final order of removal, the statements
therein are not “terms” of an order that restrict Monsalvo.
Rather, those statements merely notify Monsalvo of the
law. They retain the same force and effect whether or not
Monsalvo met his voluntary-departure deadline. The un-
derlying source of Monsalvo’s current exposure to liability
is instead the INA. §1229c(d) (codifying INA §240(B)(d),
110 Stat. 3009–597). So, the “notice” paragraph is not the
true target of Monsalvo’s petition, and it cannot supply ju-
risdiction.
   The same is true of the IJ order that the BIA incorporated
by reference. That order is the alternate order of removal
that the IJ entered when granting voluntary departure.
See supra, at 4. It simply stated that “respondent shall be
removed to Mexico on the charge in his Notice to Appear.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 51a. And, although the IJ’s decision
also warned of the statutory consequences associated with
untimeliness, this warning too was just an acknowledg-
ment of the “penalties . . . under Section 240B(d).” Id., at
51a–52a. So, that removal order is no more helpful for
Monsalvo.
   In short, Monsalvo’s theory rests on a misunderstanding
of both the scope of a final order of removal and the meaning
of the supposed “terms” of this order. Because he bears the
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                      13

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

jurisdictional burden, these shortcomings should be dispos-
itive. Steel Co., 523 U. S., at 104.3
                                C
   For its part, the majority declines to defend Monsalvo’s
jurisdictional theory. Arguments for jurisdiction are not ex-
empt from principles of party presentation and forfeiture,
so that choice should be the end of the jurisdictional road.
See, e.g., TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U. S. 413, 434–
435, n. 6 (2021).
   Instead, the majority develops its own theory for jurisdic-
tion, based on reasoning that appeared nowhere in the
briefing or at oral argument. The majority agrees with
Monsalvo that he seeks review of a “term” in his final order
of removal, but it identifies the relevant term as the BIA’s
provision of a 60-day voluntary-departure period. Ante, at
7. And, the majority concludes, the Tenth Circuit had au-
thority to interpret the meaning of “60 days” in this “term”
under its jurisdiction to review “ ‘final order[s] of removal’ ”
and “ ‘questions of law . . . arising from’ them.” Ante, at 9–
10 (quoting §§1252(a)(1), (b)(9)). The majority errs with
——————
   3 To the extent Monsalvo suggests that courts of appeals have jurisdic-

tion to review reconsideration decisions as a categorical matter, he mis-
reads both 8 U. S. C. §1252 and Reyes Mata v. Lynch, 576 U. S. 143
(2015). Section 1252(b)(9) does not authorize review of “ ‘all questions of
law and fact . . . arising from’ the removal proceedings.” Reply Brief 3.
Rather, it specifies that, absent an independent jurisdictional basis, such
questions of law and fact are reviewable only if brought “in judicial re-
view of a final order under this section.” §1252(b)(9). That language thus
facilitates reviewability only if a petitioner has in fact sought review of a
final order of removal.
   Reyes Mata did not suggest otherwise in noting that courts have long
reviewed reconsideration decisions, and that §1252(b)(6) “contemplates”
review of such decisions, in the course of reviewing final orders of re-
moval. 576 U. S., at 147–148. Those points do not conflict with the rule
that a petitioner generally must challenge a final order of removal before
he can raise other issues alongside that challenge. See §1252(b)(6) (per-
mitting consolidation of a challenge to a “motion to . . . reconsider the
order” “[w]hen a petitioner seeks review of an order under this section”).
14            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

both premises.
                                1
   Like Monsalvo, the majority errs by assuming that
Monsalvo’s challenge goes to his final order of removal. To
conclude that the grant of voluntary departure is part of
Monsalvo’s final order of removal, the majority appears to
view the order as comprising the BIA’s entire decision. See
ante, at 7. But, such a broad construction conflicts with
Nasrallah’s recognition that the CAT order was distinct,
even when situated alongside a final order of removal in the
same decision. See supra, at 8–10. Following Nasrallah, a
grant of voluntary departure is a separate order that “is not
itself a final order of removal.” 590 U. S., at 582. The BIA’s
regulations reflect that point: They speak separately of an
“order granting voluntary departure” and an “order of re-
moval.” 8 CFR §1240.26(c)(3). The scope of Monsalvo’s
voluntary-departure period is therefore a question about the
voluntary-departure order, not the final order of removal.
   The majority ignores Nasrallah’s narrow interpretation
of a “final order of removal.” Brushing past the logic of that
decision, the majority summarily asserts that Nasrallah is
consistent with its view that a final order of removal encom-
passes the entire accompanying BIA decision. Ante, at 10.
But, Nasrallah’s holding (that a CAT order is “ ‘not part of
the removal order’ ”) cannot be divorced from its reasoning
(how to identify the removal order). Contra, ante, at 10.
   In discarding Nasrallah, the majority instead relies on
the parties’ supposed agreement that the entire BIA deci-
sion constitutes a “final order of removal.” It asserts that
the parties have agreed that, “[o]n October 12, 2021, the
Board issued an order which . . . constituted a final order of
removal.” Ante, at 7. But, “federal courts have an inde-
pendent obligation to ensure that they do not exceed the
scope of their jurisdiction,” so we can accept the assumption
that we are reviewing a final order of removal only if it is in
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                         THOMAS, J., dissenting

fact true. Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 U. S. 428, 434 (2011).
   Regardless, the majority’s claim of agreement between
the parties rests on a misreading of both parties’ argu-
ments. Although the Government agrees that the BIA de-
cision contains a final order of removal, see Tr. of Oral Arg.
38, it rejects Monsalvo’s position that this order and the
BIA decision are one and the same. As the Government ex-
plains, it had previously taken the broader view based on
pre-IIRIRA case law, but this Court “rejected [it] in Nasral-
lah.” Id., at 35, 60. For his part, Monsalvo does purport to
“challeng[e] the terms of his removal order,” Reply Brief 5,
but the majority misunderstands which terms Monsalvo
puts in issue. It asserts that he seeks clarification of what
his “order meant” with respect to his obligation “to leave
voluntarily ‘within 60 days.’ ” Ante, at 7. But, as explained,
Monsalvo actually views the relevant terms as the statu-
tory penalties invoked by the BIA. Supra, at 10–11.4 The
majority’s framing of the “final order of removal” in this
case rests on a stipulation that no party makes.
                               2
  Even if Monsalvo’s voluntary-departure order could be
considered part of his final order of removal, it does not fol-
low that the Tenth Circuit would have had jurisdiction over
a request to clarify the meaning of “60 days.” As relevant
here, §1252 confers jurisdiction only for “[j]udicial review of
a final order of removal.” §1252(a)(1). The majority as-
sumes that a request for clarification would qualify, but
that assumption is debatable at best. Ante, at 7–8.
  Until now, we have understood §1252 to “ves[t] the courts


——————
  4 As best I can tell, Monsalvo does not even view the “60 days” language

as a term in his final order of removal. He states that the order contains
only “three distinct terms”—the directive that he “ ‘shall be removed,’ ”
and the two clauses regarding penalties for failure to timely depart. Re-
ply Brief 5 (quoting App. to Pet. for Cert. 42a–43a); see supra, at 11.
16            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

of appeals with the authority to consider petitions challeng-
ing ‘final orders’ commanding the ‘removal’ of aliens from
the United States.” Calcano-Martinez v. INS, 533 U. S.
348, 350 (2001). A request for clarification about an order’s
meaning, standing alone, is not a challenge to that order. It
does not ask the court to “disturb the final order of removal”
in any way. Nasrallah, 590 U. S., at 582. Rather, it
amounts to a request for a declaratory judgment, if not an
advisory opinion.
   Extending §1252 to reach such a request is hard to square
with our conception of judicial review more generally. “The
question before an appellate Court is, was the judgment cor-
rect.” McClung v. Silliman, 6 Wheat. 598, 603 (1821). After
all, “our power is to correct wrong judgments, not to revise
opinions.” Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U. S. 117, 126 (1945).
   Given that we have not previously confronted this issue,
and the parties have not briefed it, I express no definitive
view. But, it seems at minimum questionable whether an
alien who does not oppose the disposition of his final order
of removal seeks “review” of that order under §1252.
   The majority skips over this issue by resorting to
§1252(b)(9), which it reads to allow a court of appeals to ad-
dress any “ ‘questions of law . . . arising from’ ” a term in a
final order of removal. Ante, at 9. But, §1252(b)(9) is a “ju-
risdictional limitation,” not a grant of jurisdiction. AADC,
525 U. S., at 482–483. It specifies that judicial review of all
questions of law arising from removal proceedings “shall be
available only in judicial review of a final order under this
section.” §1252(b)(9). That provision thus does not say that
an alien can raise any question of law. Rather, absent an
independent jurisdictional basis, “a federal court has juris-
diction to review” such a question only “when the court
reviews a ‘final order’ of removal.” Johnson v. Arteaga-
Martinez, 596 U. S. 573, 584 (2022) (THOMAS, J., concur-
ring). Section 1252(b)(9) accordingly does not resolve what
it means for a court to “review” a final order of removal.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             17

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

                               IV
  Finally, policy considerations cannot change our analy-
sis. The majority highlights that ruling against Monsalvo
on jurisdictional grounds would lead to a curious result. We
would invite pointless litigation, the majority asserts, if we
held that §1252 requires “an individual [to] include in his
petition some challenge to his ‘removability’ from this coun-
try.” Ante, at 8. But, even if true, this consequence is beside
the point.
  “[W]e must enforce the statute that Congress enacted.”
Obduskey v. McCarthy & Holthus LLP, 586 U. S. 466, 481
(2019). That means giving effect to Congress’s decision in
§1252 to “substantially limi[t] the availability of judicial re-
view,” Nken v. Holder, 556 U. S. 418, 424 (2009), specifically
by permitting review of “all questions of law . . . arising
from any action taken or proceeding brought to remove an
alien” only in the course of reviewing a “final order of re-
moval.” §§1252(a)(1), (b)(9). And, it means giving effect to
Nasrallah’s narrow reading of the term “final order of re-
moval.”
  In many cases, a petitioner will still be able to obtain ju-
dicial review even under §1252’s “more restrictive” scheme.
AADC, 525 U. S., at 475. In Nasrallah, for example, the
Court understood its reading of “final order of removal” to
benefit Nasrallah. 590 U. S., at 582–583. But, the logic of
that decision applies just the same when its effect is to pre-
clude judicial review.
  All this is not to say that §1252 denies Monsalvo his day
in court. Perhaps, as the Government suggests, things
would have been different if he had also challenged the
BIA’s reopening decision. Brief for Respondent 20. Or, per-
haps he could still pursue relief in non-removal-related lit-
igation, such as by filing suit under the Administrative Pro-
cedure Act “after unsuccessfully seeking [the Government]
to return his voluntary departure bond or to adjust status
in the country.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 32. But, we cannot “rewrite
18            MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

the laws passed by Congress and signed by the President”
to shield Monsalvo from the consequences of his choice to
challenge only the BIA’s reconsideration decision. Nasral-
lah, 590 U. S., at 583.
                         *    *     *
   Because “a congressional grant of jurisdiction is a prereq-
uisite to the exercise of judicial power” in this case, this
Court must carefully abide by Congress’s jurisdictional
strictures. Patchak, 583 U. S., at 254 (plurality opinion).
We thus should have vacated and remanded for the Tenth
Circuit’s consideration of the jurisdictional issue. Disre-
garding Monsalvo’s jurisdictional burden, the majority in-
stead finds jurisdiction based on an unpersuasive theory of
its own creation. I respectfully dissent.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 23–929
                          _________________


HUGO ABISAÍ MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ, PETITIONER
    v. PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                         [April 22, 2025]

   JUSTICE ALITO, with whom JUSTICE KAVANAUGH joins,
dissenting.
   I agree with JUSTICE THOMAS that the Court should re-
mand this case for the Court of Appeals to decide in the first
instance whether it possessed jurisdiction to entertain peti-
tioner’s petition for review. That case-specific argument
was not raised below, and we did not grant review to decide
it. If forced to decide the jurisdictional question, however,
I would agree with JUSTICE THOMAS and JUSTICE BARRETT
that the Court of Appeals lacked jurisdiction. But because
the Court has rejected those jurisdictional arguments, I
write separately to explain why, in my view, the Court’s
analysis of the merits is wrong.
   The merits question in this case—whether petitioner left
the United States within “60 days” after October 12, 2021—
is straightforward. The 60th “day” after October 12, 2021,
was Saturday, December 11, 2021. And petitioner failed to
depart the country by that Saturday. Saturday is a day of
the week, and there is no reason why petitioner could not
have left the country on or before that date. Petitioner gives
us no reason to believe—and I am aware of none—that the
roads to Mexico, his home country, were closed; so he could
have driven or taken a bus across the border. He also could
have flown to Mexico or any other country that would admit
him. Nevertheless, the Court holds that he was entitled to
2                MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                           ALITO, J., dissenting

a 2-day extension because the last day of his voluntary de-
parture deadline happened to fall on a weekend. There is
no justification for that decision.
  The Court is sympathetic to petitioner’s plight, but the
relevant statutory provision, 8 U. S. C. §1229c(b)(2), sets a
deadline, and no matter how such a deadline is calculated,
there will always be those who happen to miss it by a day
or so. And that will be true whether the deadline is always
60 days or is sometimes extended to 61, 62, or 63 days.
There will always be a sympathetic pro se alien1 who is a
day or two late. Unless the Court is willing to extend the
statutory deadline indefinitely, it would presumably be
forced to say in such cases that a day too late is just too bad.
For this reason, sympathy for petitioner cannot justify the
Court’s decision.
  That is especially true because today’s decision will affect
cases other than petitioner’s. We have not been told how
many aliens who are granted voluntary departure are or-
dered to leave within a specified number of days after the
date of the relevant order, but assuming that roughly the
same number of such orders are issued on each day from
Monday through Friday, it is probable that nearly half of
the departure deadlines in such cases will fall on a Satur-
day, Sunday, or federal holiday. As a result, these individ-
uals will be given a windfall that is not enjoyed by most
other similarly situated aliens. As I shall explain, there is
no good reason for that disparate treatment.
                            I
  “Voluntary departure” is part of a bargain that benefits
both the Government and an alien who is subject to re-

——————
  1 The Immigration and Nationality Act uses the term “alien,” which is

defined as “any person not a citizen or national of the United States.” 66
Stat. 166, 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(3). Thus, in the language of the Act, “alien”
and “noncitizen” are not synonymous.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

moval. When such an alien voluntarily leaves, the Govern-
ment is spared “the expense of deportation,” and the alien
“avoids extended detention,” “can select the country of des-
tination,” and—what is perhaps most important—avoids
the restriction on readmission that results from deporta-
tion. Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U. S. 1, 11 (2008). Federal im-
migration law has permitted this mutually beneficial bar-
gain for nearly a century. See Alien Registration Act of
1940, 54 Stat. 672.
   That bargain is effective only if the alien lives up to his
promise to depart, and in the past that promise was not al-
ways kept. For some time, voluntary departure agreements
did not include a specific deadline, and some aliens who had
agreed to leave “ ‘continue[d] their illegal presence in the
United States for months, and even years.’ ” Dada, 554
U. S., at 9 (quoting Letter from B. Habberton, Acting Com-
missioner on Immigration and Naturalization). In 1996,
Congress tried to fix that problem by enacting the statutory
deadline at issue here. It provides that—in typical circum-
stances—“[p]ermission to depart voluntarily . . . shall not
be valid for a period exceeding 60 days.” 8 U. S. C.
§1229c(b)(2). In compliance with this provision, the Board
of Immigration Appeals (BIA) issued an order giving peti-
tioner “60 days to voluntarily depart . . . , the maximum pe-
riod allowed by [§1229c(b)(2)].” App. to Pet. for Cert. 40a.
   We generally presume that terms used in statutes carry
the same meaning they have in ordinary usage. See Niz-
Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. 155, 160 (2021) (“When called
on to resolve a dispute over a statute’s meaning, this Court
normally seeks to afford the law’s terms their ordinary
meaning at the time Congress adopted them”). Therefore,
when interpreting the term “days” in §1229c(b)(2), we
should start with the presumption that it means what it
means in ordinary usage: “a division of time equal to 24
hours and representing the average length of the period
during which the earth makes one rotation on its axis.”
4              MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

Random House Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary 510 (2d
ed. 2001). Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays fit this defini-
tion, so they presumptively qualify as “days” within the
meaning of the statute. Is there any reason to find that this
presumption is overcome?
   The Court’s answer is “yes” because, in its view, the term
“days,” as used in the voluntary departure provision, has
the special meaning that often applies in provisions that set
deadlines for filing papers in a court or government office.
See, e.g., Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 6(a)(1)(C); Fed. Rule App.
Proc. 26(a)(1)(C). But the justification for this special
rule—the fact that filing papers in a court or government
office on a weekend or holiday is often difficult or impossi-
ble—has no application where the task that must be accom-
plished may be done just as easily on any day of the week.
And that is certainly the case here. Petitioner has not pro-
vided any reason why he could not have departed on Satur-
day December 11 or Sunday December 12. He has not
claimed, for example, that his religion prohibited him from
traveling on either or both of those days. And on those days,
he could have left the United States by car, bus, or plane.
So why should anyone think that he was entitled to an ex-
tension giving him, not the 60 days prescribed by statute,
but an extra two days? In the absence of some strong con-
trary indication, “affected individuals and courts alike are
entitled to assume statutory terms bear their ordinary
meaning.” Niz-Chavez, 593 U. S., at 163. “[U]ntil and un-
less someone points to evidence” that a statute bears an al-
ternative, “specialized” meaning, we assume that the ordi-
nary meaning controls. Ibid. And there is nothing here
that can overcome that usual assumption.
                              II
                              A
    The Court rejects the ordinary meaning of the statutory
                    Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                   5

                         ALITO, J., dissenting

language because, in its view, 8 U. S. C. §1229c(b)(2) incor-
porated a “ ‘longstanding administrative construction’ ” of
the term “days,” according to which a deadline in the immi-
gration laws is taken to extend if the final day lands on a
weekend or holiday. Ante, at 12. But this argument fails
because the regulatory definition on which it rests applies
by its terms only to deadlines that appear in the immigra-
tion regulations. When Congress enacted the voluntary de-
parture deadline in 1996, the pertinent regulation stated
that “[t]he term day when computing the period of time for
taking any action provided in this chapter”—that is, in the
relevant chapter of the regulations—“shall include Satur-
days, Sundays, and legal holidays, except that when the
last day of the period so computed falls on a Saturday, Sun-
day, or a legal holiday, the period shall run until the end of
the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, nor a legal
holiday.” 8 CFR §1.1(h) (1996) (emphasis added).2 So even
if Congress had enacted this provision into law, it would not
have affected the meaning of §1229c(b)(2).
   In an effort to draw some support from this regulation,
the Court disregards its specific terms and contends that it
embodied a broader rule for counting days that applies even
when the action that must be taken by the deadline can be
done just as easily on weekends and holidays as on ordinary
business days. It is doubtful, however, that the Court is
ready to embrace all the implications of this argument. The
term “days” appears numerous times in the immigration
laws. Does the Court think that every one of these provi-
sions incorporates its unorthodox counting rule? Consider,
for example, 8 U. S. C. §1282(a), which provides that in
most instances an “alien crewman” may not be permitted to
“land temporarily in the United States” for more than 29
days. Suppose that the 29th day is a Saturday. Does that
——————
  2 A substantially identical definition now appears in 8 CFR §§1.2 and

1001.1(h) (2024).
6             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

mean that the alien crewman may stay an additional two
days? There are many other similar provisions. See, e.g.,
§1187(a)(1) (permitting the waiver of the usual visa require-
ments for a tourist seeking entry for up to 90 days);
§1184(d) (requiring certain visa applicants to establish that
they are “actually willing to conclude a valid marriage” to
an identified citizen within 90 days of arrival);
§1101(a)(13)(C)(ii) (providing that an already admitted al-
ien is regarded as seeking admission if he has been absent
from the United States for “a continuous period in excess of
180 days”); §1101(f )(7) (providing that an alien is not of
“good moral character” if he has been imprisoned, in a rele-
vant timeframe, for an aggregate period of 180 days or
more).
   If, as I assume, the Court does not mean to hold that its
unorthodox interpretation of the term “days” applies to
every immigration provision that contains that term, then
the most that might be said about the counting rule on
which it relies is that it is presumptively incorporated when
its underlying rationale—the impossibility or difficulty of
compliance on a weekend or holiday—is applicable. And if
that is so, that construction does not apply to the voluntary
departure deadline.
   I would view this case differently if it involved an admin-
istrative interpretation of a statute that contains a tech-
nical term or a term that has a special meaning in a partic-
ular industry. In United States v. Hill, 506 U. S. 546 (1993),
for example, we noted “well established” treasury regula-
tions that reflected an “accepted distinction” between the
terms “mineral deposit” and “mineral enterprise,” at least
for the purpose of taxing certain mineral interests. Id., at
553–554. And we assumed that Congress “relied” on that
“accepted distinction” when it used the term “mineral de-
posit” in a tax provision. Id., at 553. See also Corning Glass
Works v. Brennan, 417 U. S. 188, 201 (1974) (“[W]here Con-
gress has used technical words or terms of art, ‘it [is] proper
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            7

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

to explain them by reference to the art or science to which
they [are] appropriate’ ”). Here, however, the critical term
is a commonplace word used countless times in everyday
speech.
   In sum, Congress had no reason to expect that the purely
regulatory definition of “day” was a “longstanding adminis-
trative construction” that would in any way bear on the
meaning of “day” in the voluntary departure provision.
                              B
   Without support for its interpretation in ordinary lan-
guage or any special definition that is applicable in a situa-
tion like the one at hand, the Court moves on to the pre-
sumption of consistent usage, i.e., the presumption that a
term has the same meaning throughout a statute. See Pow-
erex Corp. v. Reliant Energy Services, Inc., 551 U. S. 224,
232 (2007) (“[I]dentical words and phrases within the same
statute should normally be given the same meaning” (em-
phasis added)). Invoking this presumption, the Court rea-
sons as follows: The term “days” appears not only in the
provision fixing the deadline for voluntary departure, but
also in neighboring provisions that set certain filing dead-
lines. Ante, at 13 (citing 8 U. S. C. §1229a(c)(6)(B) (motion
for reconsideration of removal order “must be filed within
30 days of the date of entry of a final administrative order
of removal”); §1229a(c)(7)(C)(i) (motion to reopen removal
proceedings “shall be filed within 90 days of the date of en-
try of a final administrative order of removal”)). As the
Court notes, the Government concedes that those filing
deadlines extend to the next business day when the final
day lands on a weekend or holiday. Ante, at 13 (citing Brief
for Respondent 43–44). And the Court therefore concludes
that the same rule should apply to the voluntary departure
deadline.
   By citing the Government’s concession about the filing
deadline provisions, the Court attempts to cloud the real
8             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                      ALITO, J., dissenting

question, which is whether this Court should interpret the
term “days” in the filing provisions and the departure pro-
vision as having the same meaning or two different mean-
ings. After all, the mere fact that the Government believes
that the section’s filing deadlines should extend when they
land on a weekend or holiday does not bind us. Cf. Loper
Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U. S. 369, 386–390,
412–413 (2024). And the Court’s willingness to accept the
Government’s interpretation of the relevant provisions is
notably selective. The Court eagerly adopts the Govern-
ment’s interpretation of the filing provisions but rejects the
Government’s position regarding the voluntary departure
provision.
  So, I repeat, the real question is what this Court should
hold regarding the meaning of the term “days” in the provi-
sions in question. We have three choices. First, we could
hold that “days” has its ordinary meaning in both the vol-
untary departure and the filing provisions. Second, we
could hold that the term has a specialized meaning—that it
incorporates the rule that a deadline should extend when
the final day lands on a weekend or holiday—in all the pro-
visions. Or third, we could hold that the term “days” in the
voluntary departure provision has the term’s ordinary
meaning but that the same term, as used in the filing pro-
visions, has the specialized meaning that often applies in
provisions of that kind.
  The presumption of consistent usage cannot justify the
choice of the second option rather than the first, and the
Court does not explain why its preferred option (number
two) is better than option three, which heeds the ordinary
meaning of the term “days” except where there is a reason
to adopt a specialized meaning. We presume that a term
has the same meaning in all provisions of a law, but the
presumption can be overcome, and there is a strong argu-
ment that it should be overcome here due to the unique rule
that has long been applied to many filing deadlines.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                     ALITO, J., dissenting

                              C
   Notably, when faced with the possibility that its counting
rule might apply to every provision of the immigration laws
that includes the term “day,” the Court retreats from the
presumption of consistent usage. It asserts that “different
statutes passed at different times against different regula-
tory backdrops may bear different meanings.” Ante, at 18,
n. 5. The Court agrees, then, that we must look at the spe-
cific circumstances under which the filing and the volun-
tary departure deadlines were enacted to determine
whether the term “day” should be given the same meaning
in each provision.
   In this case, those circumstances support the inference
that Congress intended for the filing deadlines, but not the
voluntary departure deadline, to extend when the final day
lands on a weekend or holiday. As the Court notes, since at
least the 1950s, the immigration regulations have provided
that deadlines in the regulations are extended when the fi-
nal day falls on a weekend or holiday. See ante, at 12–13
(citing 8 CFR §1.1(a)(6) (1958)). When Congress enacted
the statutory filing deadlines, it parroted filing deadlines
that already appeared in those regulations, and it did so at
the “recommendatio[n]” of the Executive Branch. Dada,
554 U. S., at 13–14. It is therefore quite possible that Con-
gress had the regulatory definition of “day” in mind when it
enacted the statutory filing deadlines. The same, however,
cannot be said for the voluntary departure deadline because
it had no regulatory precursor.
   The Court dismisses this important distinction by assert-
ing that “[e]xactly nothing in §304 hints that deadlines
found there should operate differently.” Ante, at 16. But of
course, exactly nothing in §304 says that “day” should be
given a specialized technical meaning either. The Court’s
departure from ordinary meaning is premised on its view
that Congress adopted a “ ‘longstanding administrative con-
10               MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                          ALITO, J., dissenting

struction.’ ” Ante, at 12. If the Court is going to look to reg-
ulatory history to determine the meaning of the statute’s
terms, it cannot simply close its eyes when that regulatory
history suggests that the voluntary departure deadline
should be treated differently.3
                               D
   The Court’s final argument is that the filing and volun-
tary departure deadlines are “intertwined” and that a uni-
form interpretation is therefore “sensible.” Ante, at 17. Pe-
titioner, for example, was subject to both a deadline to
voluntarily depart and a separate deadline to move to reo-
pen his removal proceedings. In reality, however, peti-
tioner only faces penalties for violating one of those dead-
lines: the 60-day voluntary departure deadline. No one
argues here that petitioner was also at risk of missing his
deadline to file a motion to reopen. After the BIA issued its
order of October 12, petitioner had 90 days to move to reo-
pen     the    removal     proceeding,     see  8    U. S. C.
§1229a(c)(7)(C)(i), which meant he had until January 10,
2022. He filed his motion well before that date, so the filing
deadline was not implicated in his case. But because he had
sought and had been granted the opportunity to leave the
country voluntarily, he was required either to comply with
the departure deadline or move to reopen before that dead-
line. See §1229c(d)(1)(B). By failing to timely depart, peti-
tioner became ineligible for relief from removal, and his mo-
tion to reopen was destined to fail on the merits. Ibid.
——————
   3 The Court contends that the Government implicitly accepted its un-

derstanding of the term “days” when it promulgated a regulation reflect-
ing the voluntary departure deadline, see ante, at 14, but that is simply
not true. The regulation incorporating the voluntary departure deadline
provides that “[i]n no event can the total period of time [to voluntarily
depart], including any extension, exceed . . . 60 days as set forth in Sec-
tion 240B of the Act.” 8 CFR §1240.26(f ) (emphasis added). Thus, the
regulation pointedly notes that the voluntary departure deadline is gov-
erned by the statute, not any regulation.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                     ALITO, J., dissenting

                       *     *     *
  The provision before us is straightforward. It provides
that “[p]ermission to depart voluntarily . . . shall not be
valid for a period exceeding 60 days.” §1229c(b)(2). Be-
cause I see no reason to apply a “specialized” definition of
“day,” I would take that language for what it’s worth. “60
days” means “60 days.”
  I must therefore respectfully dissent.
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                    BARRETT, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 23–929
                         _________________


HUGO ABISAÍ MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ, PETITIONER
    v. PAMELA BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
                        [April 22, 2025]

   JUSTICE BARRETT, with whom JUSTICE KAVANAUGH
joins, dissenting.
   I agree with JUSTICE THOMAS that the Court is wrong
about jurisdiction, but my reasoning is different from his.
JUSTICE THOMAS would hold that “a ‘final order of removal’
refers only to the portion of an [Immigration Judge] or
[Board of Immigration Appeals] decision that finds or or-
ders removability, not the entirety of that decision.” Ante,
at 8 (dissenting opinion). Meanwhile, the Court seems to
believe that the entirety of an IJ or BIA decision finding
removability is the “final order of removal.” Ante, at 9–10
(opinion of the Court). In short, JUSTICE THOMAS and the
Court disagree about how much of the document issued by
an IJ or the BIA is open to challenge: The whole thing? Or
just the underlying conclusion that the noncitizen is remov-
able?
   I would leave that dispute for another day. In my view,
there is no need to debate the scope of the removal order,
because no matter how broadly you construe it, Monsalvo
does not dispute a single word in it.
   The Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction if and only if
Monsalvo’s petition for review sought “[j]udicial review of a
final order of removal” under 8 U. S. C. §1252(a). An “ ‘or-
der of removal’ ” is an “order ‘concluding that the alien is
deportable or ordering deportation.’ ” Nasrallah v. Barr,
2             MONSALVO VELÁZQUEZ v. BONDI

                     BARRETT, J., dissenting

590 U. S. 573, 579 (2020) (quoting §1101(a)(47)(A)). Gener-
ally, an order is entered by an IJ and becomes “final” if it is
affirmed by the BIA. §1101(a)(47)(B)(i). This Court has
held that noncitizens may challenge (1) final orders of re-
moval themselves; (2) certain orders brought alongside fi-
nal orders of removal; and (3) rulings that affect the validity
of final orders of removal. See id., at 580–583. These three
categories have something in common: Each requires the
noncitizen to contest some element of the final order of re-
moval.
   Yet Monsalvo did not dispute anything in the IJ and BIA
decisions finding him removable. He asked the Tenth Cir-
cuit to review only the BIA’s denial of his motion to recon-
sider its denial of his motion to reopen his removal proceed-
ings. (As these procedural twists and turns suggest, this
case comes to us in an idiosyncratic posture.) In his motion
to reconsider, Monsalvo had asked the BIA to revisit only
its opinion that he had filed his motion to reopen before the
expiration of the voluntary departure period—a view that
the BIA had expressed in its denial of Monsalvo’s motion to
reopen. The decisions finding him removable, however, did
not address how to count days under §1229c(b)(2), much
less whether Monsalvo had overstayed his voluntary re-
moval period. So any way you slice it, Monsalvo’s petition
for review did not seek “[j]udicial review of a final order of
removal” under §1252(a)(1). Proof? Even after Monsalvo’s
victory in this Court today, every word in the IJ and BIA
decisions finding him removable remains legally valid.
   I am unpersuaded by the Court’s rationale for jurisdic-
tion. The Court attempts to reframe what is really a re-
quest for clarification about the meaning of §1229c(b)(2) as
a “challenge” to a notice provision in the original voluntary
departure order. Ante, at 6–10. But—even assuming that
the now-inoperative voluntary departure order has any rel-
evance at this stage—a request for clarification about the
order’s meaning simply does not speak to the validity of the
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                   3

                        BARRETT, J., dissenting

order itself. See ante, at 15–16 (THOMAS, J., dissenting).
   The Court’s only response is that my reading of
§1252(a)(1) is inconsistent with §1252(b)(9), also known as
the “zipper clause.” Ante, at 10–11. This argument is puz-
zling. Section 1252(b)(9) provides that certain forms of ju-
dicial review “shall be available only in judicial review of a
final order under this section.” It therefore underscores
that judicial review is available under §1252(a)(1) only if
there is a challenge to a “final order of removal.” And here,
for the reasons that I have explained, there is no such chal-
lenge.
   In short, the Court has no answer to the most important
question: How can Monsalvo seek judicial review of his final
order of removal while conceding that his final order of re-
moval was lawful? He cannot, so the Tenth Circuit lacked
jurisdiction.*
                        *     *    *
  The exact scope of a “final order of removal” has conse-
quences for a host of fact patterns besides the unusual one
before us, and because Monsalvo has not challenged any
portion of the IJ and BIA decisions finding him removable,
I would leave the issue alone. Still, I share JUSTICE
THOMAS’s bottom line: The Court should not have ad-
dressed the jurisdictional question at all, and, having
forged ahead anyway, it got the answer wrong. I respect-
fully dissent.



——————
   *At oral argument, the Government represented that Monsalvo had
other avenues for securing a judicial determination whether he had over-
stayed his voluntary departure period. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 32. Monsalvo
could have asked the Department of Homeland Security to return his
voluntary departure bond or to adjust his immigration status; if DHS
had denied the request, then Monsalvo could have sought judicial review
of DHS’s denial. Ibid.