(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

    BUFKIN v. COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                     AFFAIRS

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

     No. 23–713.      Argued October 16, 2024—Decided March 5, 2025
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) applies a “benefit-of-the-doubt
  rule” that tips the scales in a veteran’s favor when evidence regarding
  any issue material to a service-related disability claim is in “approxi-
  mate balance.” 38 U. S. C. §5107(b). Petitioners are veterans who ap-
  plied for service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) dis-
  ability benefits and were dissatisfied with the VA’s resolution of their
  claims. Petitioner Joshua Bufkin claimed that his PTSD stemmed
  from his military service, but the VA found no clear link. Petitioner
  Norman Thornton obtained service-connected PTSD disability bene-
  fits, but the VA denied his most recent request to increase his disabil-
  ity rating. These adverse determinations were reviewed de novo by
  the Board of Veterans’ Appeals, which rendered final decisions on be-
  half of the VA denying the claims. Petitioners then challenged the ad-
  verse determinations before the U. S. Court of Appeals for Veterans
  Claims (Veterans Court). Under §7261(a), the Veterans Court reviews
  legal issues de novo and factual issues for clear error. And under
  §7261(b)(1), the Veterans Court must “take due account” of the VA’s
  application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. Applying those standards,
  the Veterans Court affirmed the VA’s adverse benefit determinations,
  finding that the Board’s approximate-balance determinations were not
  clearly erroneous. The petitioners then appealed to the Federal Cir-
  cuit, challenging the Veterans Court’s legal interpretation of
  §7261(b)(1), and arguing that the statutory command to “take due ac-
  count” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule requires
  the Veterans Court to review the entire record de novo and decide for
  itself whether the evidence is in approximate balance. The Federal
  Circuit rejected this argument and affirmed.
2                        BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                                Syllabus

Held: The VA’s determination that the evidence regarding a service-re-
 lated disability claim is in “approximate balance” is a predominantly
 factual determination reviewed only for clear error. Pp. 8–17.
    (a) Under §7261(b)(1)’s plain text, the Veterans Court must “take
 due account” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
 This requirement directs the Veterans Court to give appropriate at-
 tention to the VA’s work. The Veterans Court must review the VA’s
 application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule “[i]n making the determi-
 nations under subsection (a).” §7261(b)(1). Accordingly, the standards
 of review provided in subsection (a) also govern the Veterans Court’s
 review of benefit-of-the-doubt issues. Section 7261(b)(1) makes ex-
 plicit the Veterans Court’s previously implicit duty to review the VA’s
 application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, pursuant to the standards
 set forth in subsection (a). Pp. 8–10.
    (b) The appropriate standard of review for any given challenge de-
 pends on whether the challenge is factual or legal in nature. The par-
 ties contest whether a veteran’s challenge to the VA’s determination
 that the evidence on a particular material issue is not in approximate
 balance involves a legal inquiry subject to de novo review, or a factual
 finding, or at least a predominantly factual, mixed question of law and
 fact, subject to clear-error review.
    The approximate-balance determination involves two steps. First,
 the VA reviews each item of evidence and assigns weight to it—a fact-
 finding inquiry reviewed only for clear error. Second, the VA deter-
 mines whether the evidence is in approximate balance. See §5107(b).
 This second step includes both legal and factual components: factual
 because it involves marshaling and weighing evidence, and legal be-
 cause the “approximate balance” determination involves whether the
 evidence satisfies a legal standard. The VA’s approximate-balance de-
 termination is thus at most a mixed question. And the appropriate
 standard of review for a mixed question depends “on whether answer-
 ing it entails primarily legal or factual work.” U. S. Bank N. A. v. Vil-
 lage at Lakeridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 396.
    Reviewing a determination whether record evidence is approxi-
 mately balanced is “about as factual sounding” as any question gets.
 Id., at 397. In Bufkin’s case, the Board weighed medical opinions and
 family testimony to assess his PTSD claims. Similarly, the Board in
 Thornton’s case analyzed symptom severity and medical evidence to
 assess his disability rating. Both cases demonstrate that approximate-
 balance determinations require case-specific factual review warrant-
 ing clear-error review. Pp. 10–13.
    (c) Petitioners’ counterarguments are unpersuasive. First, petition-
 ers urge that by amending §7261(b)(1) to include the modest phrase,
 “take due account,” Congress imposed a new standard of review for
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     3

                                Syllabus

  challenges to the VA’s application of the benefit-of the-doubt rule. But
  had Congress intended to do so, it would have identified a standard,
  just as it did in §7261(a). Petitioners next argue that, even if
  §7261(b)(1) incorporates §7261(a)’s standards of review, the VA’s ap-
  proximate-balance determination is much like a court’s probable-cause
  determination, which involves a mixed-question inquiry that appellate
  courts review de novo. Ornelas v. United States, 517 U. S. 690, 699.
     Two features distinguish the probable-cause determination from the
  VA’s determination here. First, probable cause is a constitutional
  standard, creating a strong presumption that determinations under
  that standard are subject to de novo review. By contrast, the approxi-
  mate-balance determination is a creature of statute, not the Constitu-
  tion. Second, probable cause poses a question that requires substan-
  tial “legal work,” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 398, but the VA’s
  approximate-balance determination lacks a comparable legal compo-
  nent.
     Petitioners contend that the Federal Circuit’s reading of §7261(b)(1)
  renders the provision superfluous. While this Court’s reading of
  §7261(b)(1) might involve some redundancy, the canon against sur-
  plusage does not apply here because petitioners have not identified a
  competing interpretation that would avoid redundancy. See Marx v.
  General Revenue Corp., 568 U. S. 371, 385. Pp. 13–17.
75 F. 4th 1368, affirmed.

   THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C.
J., and ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ.,
joined. JACKSON, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GORSUCH, J.,
joined.
                        Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 23–713
                                   _________________


  JOSHUA E. BUFKIN, PETITIONER v. DOUGLAS A.
      COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                   AFFAIRS
 NORMAN F. THORNTON, PETITIONER v. DOUGLAS
    A. COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                  AFFAIRS
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
                                 [March 5, 2025]

   JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
   When evaluating a veteran’s claim for service-related dis-
ability benefits, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
applies a unique standard of proof known as the “benefit-of-
the-doubt rule.” This rule requires the VA to “give the ben-
efit of the doubt to the claimant” whenever “there is an ap-
proximate balance of positive and negative evidence” on any
issue material to the claim. 38 U. S. C. §5107(b). When
reviewing the VA’s benefits decisions, the United States
Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Veterans Court)
must “take due account” of the VA’s application of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule. §7261(b)(1). The question before
us is what the Veterans Court must do to comply with that
statutory command. We hold that the Veterans Court must
review the VA’s application of the rule the same way it
would any other determination—by reviewing legal issues
de novo and factual issues for clear error. See §7261(a).
2                     BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

And, we hold that the VA’s determination that the evidence
is in approximate balance is a predominantly factual deter-
mination reviewed only for clear error.
                               I
                               A
   Congress provides veterans a wide range of benefits, in-
cluding compensation for disabilities caused or aggravated
by active-duty military service. §§1110, 1131. The VA, led
by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, administers the laws
that provide for those benefits. §§301, 303.
   Veterans who suffer from service-connected post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are among those entitled
to disability benefits. To establish service-connected PTSD,
the VA requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition
and linking the veteran’s symptoms with an “in-service
stressor,” as well as credible evidence that the in-service
stressor occurred. 38 CFR §3.304(f ) (2023). When the VA
finds those conditions satisfied, it assigns a disability rating
that reflects reductions in earning capacity. 38 U. S. C.
§1155; 38 CFR §4.130. This rating determines the amount
of compensation a veteran receives.
   A veteran begins the claims process by submitting a re-
quest for benefits to the VA. A VA regional office then ad-
judicates the claim. If the regional office issues an adverse
decision, the veteran may seek de novo review from the
Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The Board is an administra-
tive body within the VA that renders final decisions for the
agency. 38 U. S. C. §§7101, 7104(a).
   Congress designed the VA’s adjudicatory process to func-
tion “ ‘with a high degree of informality and solicitude for
the claimant.’ ” Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 U. S. 428, 431
(2011) (quoting Walters v. National Assn. of Radiation Sur-
vivors, 473 U. S. 305, 311 (1985)). For example, Congress
imposes no statute of limitations on a veteran’s claim for
benefits. The process at both the regional offices and the
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                      Opinion of the Court

Board is ex parte and nonadversarial. 38 CFR §§3.103(a),
20.700(c). And, the VA must assist veterans in developing
the evidence necessary to substantiate their claims. 38
U. S. C. §5103A(a)(1).
   Congress also requires the regional offices and the Board
to give veterans the benefit of the doubt on close issues.
Specifically, the VA must “consider all information and lay
and medical evidence of record,” and, “[w]hen there is an
approximate balance of positive and negative evidence re-
garding any issue material to the determination of a mat-
ter, the [VA] shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claim-
ant.” §5107(b). This rule reflects a pro-veteran policy
choice that dates back to the post-Civil War era. See 50
Fed. Reg. 34454 (1985).
   A veteran who receives an adverse decision from the
Board may appeal to the Veterans Court, an Article I tribu-
nal. The Veterans Court has exclusive jurisdiction to re-
view final decisions of the Board. §7252(a).
   Section 7261 defines the scope of the Veterans Court’s re-
view. Subsection (a), which sets forth the court’s adjudica-
tory powers, is modeled after the scope-of-review provision
in the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). See 5 U. S. C.
§706. It empowers the Veterans Court to decide relevant
questions of law; to compel action unlawfully withheld or
unreasonably delayed; and to hold unlawful and set aside
VA findings, conclusions, rules, and regulations that are ar-
bitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not
in accordance with law. 38 U. S. C. §§7261(a)(1)–(3). Un-
like the APA, however, §7261(a) imposes a slightly different
standard of review for factual findings. The Veterans Court
may set aside or reverse a factual finding only if “the find-
ing is clearly erroneous,” in contrast to the APA’s “substan-
tial evidence” standard. §7261(a)(4); see Dickinson v.
Zurko, 527 U. S. 150, 153, 162–163 (1999) (examining the
“subtle” difference between the two standards).
   Subsection (b) sets forth additional requirements that the
4                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

Veterans Court must follow “[i]n making the determina-
tions under subsection (a).” §7261(b). As originally en-
acted, the provision required only that the Veterans Court
“ ‘take due account of the rule of prejudicial error.’ ” Veter-
ans’ Judicial Review Act, §301(a), 102 Stat. 4115 (now cod-
ified at 38 U. S. C. §7261(b)(2)). We have held that this
statutory command requires the Veterans Court to apply
the same kind of harmless-error rule that courts ordinarily
apply in civil cases. Shinseki v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396, 406
(2009).
    In 2002, Congress amended subsection (b) to add the pro-
vision at issue here. Veterans Benefits Act, §401(b), 116
Stat. 2832. Codified at §7261(b)(1), it directs the Veterans
Court to “ ‘take due account of the [VA]’s application of sec-
tion 5107(b) of this title.’ ” In other words, when conducting
judicial review under subsection (a), the Veterans Court
must “take due account” of the VA’s application of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
    In most cases, an appeal to the Veterans Court is a vet-
eran’s final opportunity for judicial review of a benefits de-
cision. Although veterans may appeal certain legal issues
to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Cir-
cuit, see §7292, that court has held that it lacks jurisdiction
to review most factual determinations, including whether
the VA properly applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule in in-
dividual cases, see Ferguson v. Principi, 273 F. 3d 1072,
1076 (2001).
                             B
  Petitioners are veterans who applied for service-
connected PTSD disability benefits and were dissatisfied
with the VA’s resolution of their claims.
                            1
  Petitioner Joshua Bufkin served in the Air Force from
late 2005 to early 2006. Although Bufkin intended to join
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                      Opinion of the Court

the military police, he never received a job assignment be-
cause he could not pass the required training classes.
Bufkin blamed his poor performance on marital stress. He
reported that his wife opposed his service and had threat-
ened to commit suicide if he stayed in the military. Bufkin
ultimately requested and obtained a nonprejudicial hard-
ship discharge.
   Seven years later, Bufkin sought disability benefits from
the VA. He claimed that his military service caused several
psychiatric conditions, including PTSD. To support his
PTSD claim, Bufkin submitted a letter from a VA physician
who had recently treated him. The physician explained
that Bufkin’s wife suffered from depression, and that
Bufkin felt forced to make a choice between divorcing his
wife or leaving the military. The physician diagnosed
Bufkin with PTSD and opined that the primary stressor
was the perceived threat to his wife’s life.
   The VA regional office denied Bufkin’s claim on the
ground that the medical evidence was insufficient to estab-
lish a link between his symptoms and his military service.
Bufkin sought reconsideration, and the VA ordered a sec-
ond examination by a second VA physician. The new phy-
sician determined that Bufkin did not meet the criteria for
PTSD. He explained that the first physician was unable to
review Bufkin’s military or medical records, a limitation
that may have had a “significant impact” on Bufkin’s initial
diagnosis. App. in No. 2022–1089 (CA Fed.), pp. 29–30.
Bufkin also submitted letters from his wife and mother de-
scribing changes they observed in his personality after his
military service.
   The VA regional office reviewed the new information and
reaffirmed its denial of Bufkin’s claim. Bufkin filed a notice
of disagreement. He argued that the evidence for and
against his claim was roughly equal and that he was there-
fore entitled to “the benefit of the doubt.” §5107(b). Bufkin
then underwent a third VA examination by yet another
6                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     Opinion of the Court

physician. Like the second physician, this physician con-
cluded that Bufkin’s symptoms did not meet the criteria for
PTSD. She also noted that Bufkin’s symptoms started one
year after his discharge, and that no evidence indicated
that his military service caused a disability. The VA re-
gional office again reaffirmed its decision to deny benefits.
  Bufkin appealed to the Board. While the appeal was
pending, he submitted a short statement from a fourth phy-
sician. This physician stated that, in his opinion, Bufkin
suffered from PTSD, but he noted other doctors might dis-
agree with that diagnosis. He suggested that, at a mini-
mum, Bufkin suffered from severe anxiety disorder.
  The Board concluded that Bufkin did not suffer from
PTSD and denied his claim. In a detailed opinion, the
Board recounted each physician’s findings and medical con-
clusions. The Board observed that one physician diagnosed
Bufkin with PTSD, two physicians determined he did not
have PTSD, and one physician thought the issue was debat-
able. After carefully reviewing each medical opinion, the
Board explained that it found the second physician’s report
“especially persuasive.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a. The
Board noted that the one physician to diagnose Bufkin with
PTSD had not reviewed his military or medical records.
The Board also reviewed the letters from Bufkin’s wife and
mother but found that they lacked probative value because
neither individual had relevant medical expertise. When
taken as a whole, the Board explained, the evidence was not
in approximate balance. Accordingly, the Board deter-
mined that Bufkin was not entitled to the benefit of the
doubt.
                            2
  Petitioner Norman Thornton served in the Army from
1988 to 1991. After being honorably discharged, Thornton
applied for and received benefits for an “ ‘undiagnosed ill-
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     7

                          Opinion of the Court

ness.’ ” Id., at 32a. Years later, he sought additional bene-
fits for service-connected PTSD. The VA granted benefits
for the PTSD claim, initially rating his condition as 10%
disabling and later increasing the rating to 30%.
   In 2015, Thornton applied for another increase to his
PTSD disability rating and underwent a new VA medical
examination. The physician concluded that Thornton suf-
fered some common PTSD symptoms, including depressed
mood, anxiety, memory loss, and sleep impairment, but
questioned whether PTSD was the cause of those symp-
toms. The physician did not find several of the more severe
symptoms that earlier medical examinations had revealed,
such as suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and
panic attacks. Nevertheless, the regional office increased
Thornton’s PTSD disability rating to 50%. Thornton then
sought an additional increase to 70% and underwent an-
other medical evaluation, but the regional office main-
tained the 50% rating.
   Thornton appealed to the Board, which reviewed the evi-
dence de novo. As in Bufkin’s case, the Board thoroughly
recounted each medical report and assessed the credibility
of each physician’s findings. The Board ultimately declined
to increase Thornton’s 50% disability rating.1
                             3
  Both petitioners appealed the Board’s resolution of their
PTSD claims to the Veterans Court. They argued that the
evidence concerning their diagnoses was in “approximate
balance,” so they were entitled to the benefit of the doubt.
See §5107(b). In both cases, the Veterans Court upheld

——————
   1 At the same time, the Board granted Thornton a “total disability” rat-

ing for his separate claim of unemployability, based on the combined ef-
fect of his service-connected PTSD and the undiagnosed illness. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 86a–89a. Thornton currently receives full benefits, but
those benefits are subject to continual review. He appeals only the denial
of the increase to his PTSD disability rating.
8                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

the Board’s decisions on the ground that the Board’s
approximate-balance determinations were not clearly erro-
neous.
  The petitioners then appealed to the Federal Circuit,
challenging the Veterans Court’s legal interpretation of
§7261(b)(1). They argued that the statutory command to
“take due account” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-
the-doubt rule requires the Veterans Court to review the
entire record de novo and decide for itself whether the evi-
dence is in approximate balance.
  The Federal Circuit rejected this argument and affirmed
the Veterans Court in both cases. 75 F. 4th 1368 (2023);
2023 WL 5091653 (Aug. 9, 2023). The court held that “the
statutory command that the Veterans Court ‘take due ac-
count’ of the benefit of the doubt rule does not require the
Veterans Court to conduct any review of the benefit of the
doubt issue beyond the clear error review required by”
§7261(a). Id., at *2.
  We granted certiorari to decide what it means to “take
due account” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-
doubt rule. 601 U. S. ___ (2024).
                              II
                              A
   We start, as always, with the text. Section 7261(b)(1) pro-
vides that “[i]n making the determinations under subsec-
tion (a),” the Veterans Court “shall” “take due account of
the [VA]’s application of [the benefit-of-the-doubt rule].”
   The plain meaning of the text reveals the scope of the
Veterans Court’s task. It is undisputed that the word
“shall” imposes a mandatory command.              Shapiro v.
McManus, 577 U. S. 39, 43 (2015). “Shall” means “must.”
Kingdomware Technologies, Inc. v. United States, 579 U. S.
162, 171–172 (2016). It is likewise undisputed that to “take
account of ” something means to give it attention or consid-
eration. See American Heritage Dictionary 1763 (4th ed.
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     9

                          Opinion of the Court

2000) (defining “take account of ” as “[t]o take into consid-
eration”). The word “due” qualifies the attention that the
VA must give. “Due” means “appropriate” or “proper.” See
4 Oxford English Dictionary 1105 (2d ed. 1989) (“Merited,
appropriate: proper, right”); Black’s Law Dictionary 515
(7th ed. 1999) (“Just, proper, regular, and reasonable”).
   Taken together, the statutory command to “take due ac-
count” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt
rule requires the Veterans Court to give appropriate atten-
tion to the VA’s work, at least when the issue is properly
presented. See id., at 516 (defining “due consideration” as
“[t]he degree of attention properly paid to something, as the
circumstances merit”).2
   The text makes clear that the appropriate attention due
is that which is required under subsection (a). Sec-
tion 7261(b)(1) states that the Veterans Court must “take
due account” of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-
doubt rule only “[i]n making the determinations under sub-
section (a).” This language highlights that taking due ac-
count is not a freestanding task but rather an aspect of ju-
dicial review under subsection (a).
   The upshot is straightforward. Review of the VA’s
benefit-of-the-doubt decision is just another determination
made “under subsection (a).” §7261(b)(1). Accordingly, the
standards of review provided in subsection (a) also govern
the Veterans Court’s review of benefit-of-the-doubt issues.
In particular, subsection (a) requires the Veterans Court to
review the VA’s conclusions of law de novo and its findings
of fact for clear error. See §§7261(a)(1) and (4). Which
standard applies will depend on whether a veteran raises a
legal or factual objection.
——————
  2 Petitioners invite us to decide whether the Veterans Court must ad-

dress the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule when a veteran
does not raise the issue as a ground for reversal. Because both petition-
ers adequately preserved and raised their challenges below, we leave
that question for another day.
10                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

  Section 7261(b)(1) makes explicit the Veterans Court’s
previously implicit duty to review the VA’s application of
the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, pursuant to the standards set
forth in subsection (a). Of course, this duty predated Con-
gress’s enactment of §7261(b)(1); subsection (a) always re-
quired the Veterans Court to review all relevant findings of
fact and conclusions of law. See §§7261(a)(1) and (4). But,
Congress’s enactment underscores the benefit-of-the-doubt
rule’s status as a paramount consideration.
                               B
  The next question, then, is the appropriate standard of
review for challenges to the VA’s application of the benefit-
of-the-doubt rule. The applicable standard will vary with
the challenge, as the application of the rule has both factual
and legal components. A veteran may challenge any aspect
of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule on
appeal.
  No one disputes that challenges to the VA’s legal conclu-
sions are subject to de novo review. For example, if the vet-
eran argues that the VA misunderstood the definition of
“approximate balance,” the Veterans Court would construe
the challenge as a legal one and review it de novo. So too if
the veteran argues that the VA gave the benefit of the doubt
to the wrong party.
  These arguments, however, are not the typical argu-
ments a veteran raises on appeal. In mine-run cases, in-
cluding the two before us, a veteran challenges the VA’s de-
termination that the evidence on a particular material
issue is not in approximate balance.
  Petitioners assert that the approximate-balance determi-
nation is a legal inquiry subject to de novo review. The Gov-
ernment counters that the determination is a factual find-
ing, or at least a mixed question that is predominantly
factual and reviewed for clear error. After closely examin-
ing the way in which the VA conducts the approximate-
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                     Opinion of the Court

balance inquiry, we conclude it is a predominantly factual
question and thus subject to clear-error review.
  The approximate-balance determination involves two
steps. First, the VA reviews each item of evidence in the
record and assigns weight to it. Both sides agree that this
aspect of the VA’s analysis is factfinding reviewed only for
clear error. Second, the VA assesses the weight of the evi-
dence as a whole, deciding whether “there is an approxi-
mate balance of positive and negative evidence” on any ma-
terial issue. §5107(b). The VA gives the benefit of the doubt
to the veteran only after determining that the positive evi-
dence and negative evidence on a material issue are in ap-
proximate balance. Otherwise, the VA simply resolves the
issue in favor of the party with the more persuasive evi-
dence.
  The second step—deciding whether the evidence as a
whole is approximately balanced—has both legal and fac-
tual components. The task is partly factual because it in-
volves marshaling and weighing evidence. See U. S. Bank
N. A. v. Village at Lakeridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 396
(2018). The VA must categorize the evidence based on
whether it supports or undermines the veteran’s claim. Af-
ter doing so, the VA compares the relative strength and per-
suasiveness of the evidence on each side. Assigning weight
to evidence—whether individual pieces of evidence or col-
lections of it—is an inherently factual task. See ibid. But,
the VA’s decision also involves a legal determination. After
assessing the weight of the assorted evidence, the VA must
decide whether the evidence is in “approximate balance.”
See §5107(b). In other words, the VA must determine
whether the evidence satisfies a legal standard. Because
the VA’s approximate-balance determination involves both
legal and factual work, it is at most a mixed question, not a
12                      BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                         Opinion of the Court

purely legal one.3
  The appropriate standard of review for a mixed question
depends “on whether answering it entails primarily legal or
factual work.” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396. Some mixed
questions require a court to “expound on the law” by “am-
plifying or elaborating on a broad legal standard.” Ibid.
When applying the law involves developing legal principles
for use in future cases, appellate courts typically review the
decision de novo. Ibid. Other mixed questions require
courts to resolve “case-specific factual issues.” Ibid. When
the tribunal below is “immerse[d]” in facts and compelled to
“marshal and weigh evidence” and “make credibility judg-
ments,” the appellate court “should usually review a deci-
sion with deference.” Ibid.
  Reviewing a determination whether record evidence is
approximately balanced is “about as factual sounding” as
any question gets. Id., at 397. Consider Bufkin’s case. To
decide whether Bufkin was entitled to the benefit of the
doubt, the Board reviewed four medical opinions and two
letters from Bufkin’s family members. After assigning
weight to each item, the Board assessed whether the evi-
dence was roughly equal. To make that determination, the
Board had to consider evidence of Bufkin’s symptoms and
their causes, while assessing the credibility of the physi-
cians who treated him. Thornton’s case is no different. The
Board assessed the weight of his symptoms, the degree
to which they affected his day-to-day life, and the credi-
bility of each physician. These cases illustrate that the
approximate-balance determination necessarily immerses
——————
   3 We need not decide whether the VA’s approximate-balance determi-

nation is best characterized as a mixed question or a factual one. See
Alexander v. South Carolina State Conference of the NAACP, 602 U. S. 1,
18–19 (2024) (observing that “a finding of fact” may involve application
of a “standard of proof ” with a “substantial legal component”). Whether
the determination is mixed or factual, clear-error review is appropriate
because it is at least predominantly factual.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            13

                      Opinion of the Court

the Board “in case-specific factual issues.” Id., at 396.
When that is so—that is, when the initial decisionmaker is
“marshal[ing] and weigh[ing] evidence” and “mak[ing] cred-
ibility judgments”—its work is fact intensive, and its deter-
minations should be reviewed with deference. Ibid.
                              C
   Petitioners and the dissent offer various paths to a differ-
ent result. But, their arguments are not persuasive.
   First, petitioners urge us to hold that with one modest
phrase, “take due account,” Congress imposed a new stand-
ard of review for challenges to the VA’s application of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule. Before the Federal Circuit, peti-
tioners argued that §7261(b)(1) established a de novo stand-
ard of review. They hesitate to call the standard “de novo
review” before this Court, instead describing it as “APA-
plus.” Brief for Petitioners 25, 41–42.
   However labeled, the directive to “take due account” does
not do the work that petitioners envision. Had Congress
intended to impose a new standard of review for challenges
to the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, it
would have clearly named a standard—just as it did in
§7261(a). But, as we have explained, Congress chose not to
announce any new standard in §7261(b)(1). It instead in-
corporated the pre-existing standards of review set forth in
subsection (a).
   Petitioners contend, in the alternative, that even if
§7261(b)(1) incorporates the standards of review in
§7261(a), the VA’s approximate-balance determination is a
legal question subject to de novo review under §7261(a).
The dissent adopts a similar view, arguing that the approx-
imate-balance determination is a predominantly legal
mixed question. Post, at 12–16 (opinion of JACKSON, J.).
   The de novo standard applies, they say, because the
approximate-balance determination resembles other legal
or predominantly legal questions that courts review de
14                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      Opinion of the Court

novo. They point to judicial review of a court’s probable-
cause determination as one such analogue. Post, at 14–15.
Probable cause is the standard by which a court assesses
whether a police officer’s search or seizure was permissible
under the Fourth Amendment. For example, “probable
cause to search . . . exist[s] where the known facts and cir-
cumstances are sufficient to warrant a man of reasonable
prudence in the belief that contraband or evidence of a
crime will be found.” Ornelas v. United States, 517 U. S.
690, 696 (1996). We have held that this inquiry is a mixed
question that courts review de novo. See id., at 699.
   Two features of the probable-cause determination distin-
guish it from the approximate-balance determination, how-
ever, and underscore why courts review it de novo. First,
because probable cause is a constitutional standard, we
start with a strong presumption that determinations under
that standard are subject to de novo review, even if they
require courts to “plung[e] into a factual record.” U. S.
Bank, 583 U. S., at 396, n. 4. Second, probable cause at bot-
tom poses a question that requires substantial “legal work.”
Id., at 398. Because probable cause asks whether the “of-
ficer’s understanding of the facts and his understanding of
the relevant law” was “reasonable,” Heien v. North Caro-
lina, 574 U. S. 54, 61–64 (2014), it requires an objective, le-
gally grounded inquiry as to what a hypothetical person
could have found, see Kentucky v. King, 563 U. S. 452, 464
(2011). The answer to how a hypothetical person would act
is, by its nature, one that courts refine over time, building
out principles that “acquire content only through applica-
tion.” Ornelas, 517 U. S., at 697. De novo review is there-
fore essential so that courts can ensure “unif[orm] prece-
dent” that will “provid[e] law enforcement officers with a
defined set of rules which, in most instances, makes it pos-
sible to reach a correct determination beforehand as to
whether an invasion of privacy is justified.” Ibid. (internal
quotation marks omitted).
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           15

                      Opinion of the Court

   The VA’s approximate-balance determination differs on
both counts. First, the standard is a creature of statute.
Because it does not dwell “[i]n the constitutional realm,” it
is not entitled to the presumption of de novo review that
applies to probable cause. U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396,
n. 4. Second, the approximate-balance inquiry does not
have a comparable legal component. Instead, as these cases
exemplify, that inquiry tends to be case specific and fact in-
tensive, with courts evaluating the weight of the evidence
for and against a particular veteran’s claim. To decide
Bufkin’s claim, for example, the VA reviewed a panoply of
medical and lay evidence, and Bufkin’s central argument
before the Veterans Court was that the overall balance of
this evidence was closer than the VA thought. Thornton’s
claim similarly presented case-specific, fact-bound issues
about the existence and severity of symptoms. Resolution
of these claims is unlikely to generate guidance for the VA
or future courts in the way that probable-cause precedents
do for police and the courts.
   The VA’s approximate-balance determination is likewise
distinct from a court’s conclusion that evidence is sufficient
to support a criminal conviction, a conclusion that courts
review de novo. See Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307,
318–319 (1979). While the sufficiency-of-the-evidence in-
quiry necessarily turns on facts, the reviewing court does
not decide for itself whether the evidence establishes guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. Instead, it construes all evi-
dence and makes all reasonable inferences in favor of the
prosecution, and asks whether “any rational trier of fact
could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond
a reasonable doubt.” Id., at 319. Courts therefore conduct
their review through a legal lens, applying a hypothetical,
objective standard and putting a thumb on the scale in fa-
vor of the prevailing party—the prosecution. No one—peti-
tioners and the dissent included—wants the Veterans
Court to do that. Instead, petitioners and the dissent would
16                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                       Opinion of the Court

have the Veterans Court “weigh the evidence” in the first
instance and then make “inferences from basic facts to ulti-
mate facts”—precisely what a court may not do on suffi-
ciency review. Ibid.
   Petitioners and the dissent also rely heavily on the asser-
tion that our reading of §7261(b)(1) renders the provision
superfluous. Post, at 9–11. That objection is a serious one.
“We are reluctant to treat statutory terms as surplusage in
any setting.” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Our reluctance in-
creases when Congress amends a statute, as we ordinarily
presume that when Congress does so, “ ‘it intends its
amendment to have real and substantial effect.’ ” Intel
Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 542 U. S. 241, 258–
259 (2004).
   But, our reading of §7261(b)(1) gives that provision a
function, even if it might involve some redundancy. As we
have explained, Congress’s amendment makes express the
Veterans Court’s obligation to review challenges to the VA’s
application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule according to the
standards set forth in §7261(a). Moreover, as the dissent
notes, we have left open the possibility that Congress’s en-
actment requires the Veterans Court to review the VA’s ap-
plication of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule even if the veteran
fails to present that issue on appeal. See n. 2, supra; post,
at 10. If the Court were to decide that Congress’s enact-
ment changed the party-presentation requirement, then
the enactment of §7261(b)(1) would serve an additional in-
dependent function.
   Notably, the dissent fails to offer a reading of the text that
avoids redundancy. According to the dissent, the VA’s
approximate-balance determination is a predominantly le-
gal question subject to de novo review. Post, at 12–16. But,
if the dissent were correct, then the approximate-balance
determination would have been subject to de novo review
even before the enactment of §7261(b)(1). All agree that
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                 17

                     Opinion of the Court

under §7261(a), which predated Congress’s enactment of
§7261(b)(1), the Veterans Court is required to review ques-
tions of law de novo. Thus, under the dissent’s interpreta-
tion—no less than ours—the enactment of §7261(b)(1)
merely underscores a pre-existing duty. The canon against
surplusage can be meaningful when a competing interpre-
tation would avoid superfluity. Microsoft Corp. v. i4i L. P.,
564 U. S. 91, 106 (2011). But, when both interpretations
involve the same redundancy, the canon against surplusage
simply does not apply. See Marx v. General Revenue Corp.,
568 U. S. 371, 385 (2013) (declining to apply the canon
against surplusage when no interpretation would give ef-
fect to every word).
   In any event, “[s]ometimes the better overall reading of
the statute contains some redundancy.” Rimini Street, Inc.
v. Oracle USA, Inc., 586 U. S. 334, 346 (2019). Here, the
text leaves no doubt that the Federal Circuit’s reading of
the statute is the better one.
                          *   *     *
  Section 7261(b)(1) does not establish a new standard of
review for challenges to the VA’s application of the benefit-
of-the-doubt rule. Instead, it requires the Veterans Court
to apply the appropriate standard of review under §7261(a).
Because the VA’s approximate-balance determination is a
predominantly factual question, the Veterans Court re-
views it for clear error. §7261(a)(4).
                          III
  The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

                                                  It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 23–713
                          _________________


  JOSHUA E. BUFKIN, PETITIONER v. DOUGLAS A.
      COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                   AFFAIRS
 NORMAN F. THORNTON, PETITIONER v. DOUGLAS
    A. COLLINS, SECRETARY OF VETERANS
                  AFFAIRS
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
                         [March 5, 2025]

   JUSTICE JACKSON, with whom JUSTICE GORSUCH joins,
dissenting.
   The Court draws two conclusions from today’s evaluation
of Congress’s “take due account” admonition. See 38
U. S. C. §7261(b)(1). First, it holds that when the United
States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Veterans
Court) reviews the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s)
application of the “benefit-of-the-doubt” rule, that appellate
tribunal must use the “same” standards of review that ap-
ply to its assessment of any other VA claims determination.
Ante, at 1. Second, the Court concludes that whether
evidence is in “approximate balance” for purposes of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule is a “predominantly factual deter-
mination” to be reviewed only for clear error. Ante, at 2.
   The majority is wrong in both respects. Nothing about
the text, context, or drafting history of subsection (b)(1)
demonstrates that “take due account” actually means “pro-
ceed as normal.” Reading the provision in that fashion, as
the majority does, makes little sense. That interpretation
2                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

is also inconsistent with how we have treated identical lan-
guage elsewhere in this same statute and renders meaning-
less the “take due account” command that Congress specif-
ically amended §7261(b) to insert.
   The majority’s clear-error conclusion fares no better, in-
sofar as its reasoning ignores what appellate courts do and
what we have consistently said about substantially similar
circumstances. That is, even if the majority were correct
that subsection (b)(1) instructs the Veterans Court to carry
on applying the usual standards, clear-error review would
not be appropriate because whether the VA properly ap-
plied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not present a ques-
tion of fact. The VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determination
poses, at most, a mixed question of law and fact—and one
that is substantively indistinguishable from the kinds of
mixed questions that this Court has long said are subject to
de novo review on appeal.
   In short, the Court today concludes that Congress meant
nothing when it inserted subsection (b)(1) in response to
concerns that the Veterans Court was improperly rub-
berstamping the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determinations,
and also that the Veterans Court is not obliged to do any-
thing more than defer to those agency decisions notwith-
standing Congress’s “take due account” direction. I respect-
fully dissent.
                               I
   Under the time-honored benefit-of-the-doubt rule, veter-
ans asserting claims for service-connected disabilities are
entitled to have any reasonable doubt on a material issue
resolved in their favor. Congress codified this rule in 1988:
Section 5107(b) of Title 38 states unequivocally that the VA
must “give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant” when-
ever “there is an approximate balance of positive and nega-
tive evidence regarding any issue material to the” veteran’s
benefits claim. This generous standard of proof honors the
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

sacrifices of those who have served in the Armed Forces.
  Recognizing the weighty interests at stake in cases that
involve benefits for veterans, Congress’s 1988 legislation
also established judicial review of the VA’s benefits deci-
sions by the Veterans Court, a specialized Article I tribunal.
Section 7261(a) lays out in detail the authority that the Vet-
erans Court has been given. As relevant here, the Veterans
Court is authorized to (1) “decide all relevant questions of
law”; (2) “compel action of the Secretary unlawfully with-
held or unreasonably delayed”; and (3) “hold unlawful and
set aside” certain VA decisions. §§7261(a)(1)–(3). Notably,
clause (4) of §7261(a) states that “in the case of a finding of
material fact adverse to the claimant made in reaching a
decision in a case before the [VA] with respect to benefits,”
the Veterans Court shall “hold unlawful and set aside or
reverse such finding if the finding is clearly erroneous.”
§7261(a)(4).
  For present purposes, all parties agree that §7261(a) has
always authorized the Veterans Court to review the VA’s
application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. But judicial re-
view of that issue proved illusory from the start, because
the Veterans Court historically applied a deferential stand-
ard of review for assessing the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt de-
terminations. See, e.g., Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49,
57–58 (1990); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367
(2001). As a result, veterans groups routinely complained
to Congress that judicial review by the Veterans Court was
inappropriately deferential. See, e.g., Hearing before the
Senate Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, 107th Cong., 2d
Sess., 47 (2002) (statement of the legislative director of a
veterans group); see also Brief for Federal Circuit Bar As-
sociation as Amicus Curiae 11–14.
  Congress responded in 2002, when it amended §7261(b)
to specifically require the Veterans Court to “take due ac-
count of ” the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt
rule. §7261(b)(1). In its entirety, the amended subsection
4                        BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

(b) states:
       “(b) In making the determinations under subsection
     (a), the [Veterans] Court shall review the record of pro-
     ceedings before the Secretary and the Board of Veter-
     ans’ Appeals . . . and shall—
       “(1) take due account of the Secretary’s application of
     section 5107(b) of this title; and
       “(2) take due account of the rule of prejudicial error.”
     §7261(b).1
The plain text of §7261(b)(1) thus requires the Veterans
Court to “take due account” of the VA’s obligations under
the benefit-of-the-doubt rule when it reviews VA benefits
determinations under §7261(a).
                              II
  The dispute before us concerns the meaning of subsection
(b)(1)’s “take due account” clause. The majority and I agree
that subsection (b)(1) imposes a “statutory command” that
the Veterans Court “give appropriate attention to the VA’s
work” related to its application of the benefit-of-the-doubt
rule. Ante, at 9. But the majority concludes that the “ap-
propriate attention due is that which is required under sub-
section (a).” Ibid. In my view, that holding is unmoored
from subsection (b)(1)’s text, ignores §7261’s overall struc-
ture and drafting history, and renders entirely superfluous
Congress’s requirement that the Veterans Court “take due
account” of the application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
The better reading of the statute recognizes that subsection
(b)(1) requires the Veterans Court to determine, without
——————
   1 Subsection (b)(1) cross references §5107(b), which (as explained above

and bears repeating) codifies the benefit-of-the-doubt rule: “When there
is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding
any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall
give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.” §5107(b). The reference
to “the Secretary” in §5107(b) and §7261(b)(1) includes the VA’s regional
offices and the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. See ante, at 2–3.
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

deference, whether the VA properly applied the benefit-of-
the-doubt rule.
                               A
    The primary textual pillar of the majority’s conclusion
that “[r]eview of the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt decision is
just another determination made ‘under subsection (a)’ ” is
its observation that subsection (b)(1)’s review applies only
“ ‘[i]n making the determinations under subsection (a).’ ”
Ante, at 9 (quoting §7261(b)(1)). Based on that prefatory
language, the majority reasons that subsection (b)(1) is
merely an “aspect of ” the review that the Veterans Court
performs under subsection (a), such that the “standards of
review provided in subsection (a) also govern the Veterans
Court’s review of benefit-of-the-doubt issues.” Ante, at 9.
    But the fact that the Veterans Court must apply subsec-
tion (b)(1) “[i]n making the determinations under subsec-
tion (a)” does not justify collapsing these two provisions.
The word “in,” when paired with a gerund—here, “mak-
ing”—is generally “equivalent in sense to a temporal clause
introduced by when, while, if, [or] in the event of.” 7 Oxford
English Dictionary 760 (2d ed. 1989) (emphasis in original).
The “in making” clause in subsection (b) thus merely pro-
vides that when the Veterans Court makes one of the deter-
minations authorized by subsection (a), it must also satisfy
its duty to “take due account of ” the VA’s application of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule. In other words, the “in making”
clause the majority seizes upon to justify its same-
standards holding simply establishes that review under
subsection (b)(1) occurs alongside review under subsection
(a), not that they are the same thing.
    Interpreting subsection (b)(1) to require a separate, con-
current review of the VA’s compliance with the benefit-of-
the-doubt rule is consistent with how this Court has inter-
preted subsection (b)(1)’s parallel provision—subsection
6                       BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                       JACKSON, J., dissenting

(b)(2). Subsection (b)(2) directs that, “[i]n making the de-
terminations under subsection (a),” the Veterans Court
shall “take due account of the rule of prejudicial error.”
§7261(b)(2). In Shinseki v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396 (2009),
we held that subsection (b)(2) “requires the Veterans Court
to apply the same kind of ‘harmless-error’ rule that courts
ordinarily apply in civil cases,” id., at 406. We did not sug-
gest—much less hold—that subsection (a)’s standards of re-
view governed subsection (b)(2)’s “take due account” clause.
To the contrary, we explained that the Veterans Court is
not prevented from “directly asking the harmless-error
question” and “resting its conclusion on the facts and cir-
cumstances of the particular case.” Id., at 408.
   Thus, there is no dispute that, under subsection (b)(2),
the Veterans Court analyzes whether any error was harm-
less de novo, without applying the standards of review pre-
scribed by subsection (a). And because subsection (a)’s
standards do not apply when the Veterans Court “take[s]
due account of the rule of prejudicial error” under subsec-
tion (b)(2), it is oddly discordant for the majority to conclude
that those standards do apply when the Veterans Court
“take[s] due account of the Secretary’s application of ” the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule. See FCC v. AT&T Inc., 562 U. S.
397, 408 (2011) (“ ‘[I]dentical words and phrases within the
same statute should normally be given the same mean-
ing’ ”).
   An understanding of how subsection (b)(2)’s “take due ac-
count” language functions in practice further clarifies sub-
section (b)(1), as subsection (b)(2) existed prior to subsection
(b)(1) and plainly served as its model. The majority does
not dispute that the VA’s appellate tribunal, the Board of
Veterans’ Appeals, sometimes applies the rule of prejudicial
error in the first instance. See, e.g., Medrano v. Nicholson,
21 Vet. App. 165, 170 (2007).2 If the Board determines that
——————
 2 This happens often in the context of notice errors. Consistent with
                      Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                     7

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

an error was harmless and denies a veteran’s claim, then
per subsection (b)(2), the Veterans Court reviews the record
for prejudicial error and does so “de novo, in other words,
without any deference to the Board,” before affirming. Id.,
at 171. Subsection (b)(1) works in precisely the same way:
If the Veterans Court is inclined to affirm the VA’s denial
of benefits, subsection (b)(1) requires it to first confirm
de novo that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule was properly ap-
plied.
                              B
   Nor does the drafting history of the relevant provisions
support the majority’s contention that subsection (b)(1) is
an “aspect” of subsection (a), or that subsection (a)(4) sub-
stantively limits the review that subsection (b)(1) requires.
In fact, the historical account suggests the opposite. The
initial Senate bill amended subsection (a)(4)—rather than
subsection (b)—to command that the Veterans Court
“tak[e] into account” the VA’s application of the benefit-of-
the-doubt rule. S. Rep. No. 107–234, p. 40 (2002) (italics
deleted). That bill also proposed two other relevant
changes: It authorized the Veterans Court to “reverse” the
VA’s factual findings rather than remand them, and it elim-
inated the “clearly erroneous” standard of review. Ibid.
(italics deleted). Accordingly, under the Senate’s bill, sub-
section (a)(4) would have authorized the Veterans Court to
“set aside or reverse” any factual finding of the VA that was
“unsupported by substantial evidence of record, taking into
——————
the pro-claimant nature of the veterans-disability system, the VA has a
statutory obligation to notify veterans of certain information. Shinseki
v. Sanders, 556 U. S. 396, 400 (2009) (citing 38 U. S. C. §5103(a)). If the
VA breaches that duty, the Board may nonetheless deny a veteran’s
claim if it determines that the notice error was harmless. The Veterans
Court reviews any such harmlessness determination de novo. See, e.g.,
Medrano, 21 Vet. App., at 170, 173; Lowery v. McDonough, 2024 WL
3949253, *4, *5–*6 (Vet. App., Aug. 27, 2024) (unpublished); Weaver v.
Shinseki, 2011 WL 2745773, *1 (Vet. App., July 13, 2011) (unpublished).
8                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

account the Secretary’s application of ” the benefit-of-the-
doubt rule. Ibid. (italics deleted).
   Had Congress adopted this proposal, the majority’s con-
flation of subsections (a) and (b)(1) might stand on firmer
ground. But Congress plainly rejected that approach. It
instead amended subsection (a)(4) only to empower the Vet-
erans Court to reverse certain factual findings (i.e., those
that are material and adverse to the claimant), and neither
modified subsection (a)(4)’s clear-error standard nor in-
serted a requirement that the Veterans Court review the
VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule into that
provision. §401, 116 Stat. 2832. At the end of the day, then,
instead of incorporating a benefit-of-the-doubt-rule re-
minder into subsection (a)(4), Congress crafted an entirely
new statutory provision—subsection (b)(1)—to address ju-
dicial review of the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-
doubt rule. Ibid.
   Recognizing that review under subsection (b)(1) is dis-
tinct from review under subsection (a)(4) respects Con-
gress’s choice to separate those two provisions. It also com-
ports with subsection (b)(1)’s language and the statute’s
overall design. No one disputes that Congress sought to
subject the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt decisions to increased
judicial scrutiny while otherwise preserving the VA’s not-
clearly-erroneous factual findings. Reading subsection
(b)(1) to be such a congressional mandate furthers that ob-
jective, while the majority’s conclusion that subsection
(b)(1) implicitly incorporates subsection (a)(4)’s limited
clear-error standard undermines it.
                               C
  The usual indicators of statutory meaning thus confirm
that subsection (b)(1) was meant to have bite. But the ma-
jority’s reading renders it toothless. According to the ma-
jority, subsection (b)(1) does not impose any new obligation
                   Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)              9

                      JACKSON, J., dissenting

on the Veterans Court; instead, that provision merely “un-
derscores” the importance of §5107(b)’s benefit-of-the-doubt
rule. Ante, at 10. At oral argument, the Government put
the matter even more bluntly, arguing that subsection
(b)(1) is an “exclamation point” that does “duplicate work”
and is ultimately “redundant.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 42, 44. This
interpretation, which the majority adopts, violates the “car-
dinal principle of statutory interpretation” that courts ordi-
narily “ ‘ “give effect, if possible, to every clause and word of
a statute.” ’ ” Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 404 (2000)
(quoting United States v. Menasche, 348 U. S. 528, 538–539
(1955)).
  The majority acknowledges that the surplusage argu-
ment is “a serious one” and that its interpretation “might
involve some redundancy.” Ante, at 16. Still, the majority
maintains that subsection (b)(1) has a “function” even if it
performs zero independent work. Ibid. That is because, as
the majority sees it, subsection (b)(1) makes “express” the
Veterans Court’s duty to hear challenges to the VA’s appli-
cation of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule under subsection (a),
and may even require the Veterans Court to do so
sua sponte. Ibid. But the majority cannot overcome the
surplusage problem simply by asserting that subsection
(b)(1) emphasizes or clarifies a pre-existing duty. To state
the obvious, “most superfluous language” can be justified as
providing “clarity.” NLRB v. SW General, Inc., 580 U. S.
288, 304 (2017). Perhaps for this reason, the majority does
not identify any other case in which this Court held that
Congress passed an amendment with no substantive effect.
  Moreover, the majority does not and cannot explain why
any such expression of the Veterans Court’s duties was
needed—much less why Congress would go out of its way to
amend the statute to underscore an existing obligation.
Subsection (a) covers the waterfront of possible exercises of
judicial authority and has always required the Veterans
Court to consider any argument “presented” by a veteran.
10                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

Subsection (a) cannot be reasonably read to exclude consid-
eration of a veteran’s claim that the VA misapplied the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule. And no one actually thought this;
indeed, prior to Congress’s enactment of subsection (b)(1),
the Veterans Court regularly considered challenges to the
VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule—it just did
so deferentially. See supra, at 3–4.
    Thus, the problem that Congress enacted subsection
(b)(1) to address was not that the Veterans Court seemed to
have limited authority under subsection (a). Nor was it
that the Veterans Court was somehow unaware of its duty
to review the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the doubt
rule upon request. Rather, as I have explained, Congress
enacted subsection (b)(1) after veterans service organiza-
tions brought to its attention how the Veterans Court was
performing that review—i.e., it was giving too much defer-
ence to the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determinations. Ibid.
Congress’s indisputable focus was on the improper degree
of deference the Veterans Court was affording to the VA’s
determinations, a target that the majority’s reading misses
completely. Nor is the majority’s surplusage problem
solved by the “possibility” that subsection (b)(1) requires
sua sponte review of the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determi-
nations. Ante, at 16. Even assuming that subsection (b)(1)
seeks to effect that change, sua sponte review would make
no difference unless the Veterans Court proceeds nondefer-
entially. A rubberstamp applied to every case remains a
rubberstamp.
    Finally, the majority maintains that if Congress had in-
tended for subsection (b)(1) to do anything other than un-
derscore the pre-existing duty to consider challenges to the
VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determinations, it would have
more clearly said so. Ante, at 13. That gets things exactly
backwards. Ordinarily, when Congress amends a statute,
“ ‘ “we presume it intends its amendment to have real and
substantial effect.” ’ ” Husky Int’l Electronics, Inc. v. Ritz,
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           11

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

578 U. S. 355, 359 (2016) (quoting United States v. Quality
Stores, Inc., 572 U. S. 141, 148 (2014)). The majority in-
stead presumes that Congress intended to enact a do-
nothing amendment. But if Congress had wanted to main-
tain the status quo, why enact subsection (b)(1) at all? The
presumption is, and should be, that Congress expects a
change when it goes through the trouble of amending a stat-
ute. And, here, the majority’s reasoning has plainly failed
to overcome that presumption.
                               D
  The veterans canon resolves whatever lingering doubt
might remain about the proper interpretation of subsection
(b)(1). We have “long applied ‘the canon that provisions for
benefits to members of the Armed Services are to be con-
strued in the beneficiaries’ favor.’ ” Henderson v. Shinseki,
562 U. S. 428, 441 (2011) (quoting King v. St. Vincent’s Hos-
pital, 502 U. S. 215, 220–221, n. 9 (1991)). Likewise, under
the veterans canon, “interpretive doubt is to be resolved in
the veteran’s favor.” Brown v. Gardner, 513 U. S. 115, 118
(1994).
  The veterans canon strongly supports interpreting sub-
section (b)(1) to represent more than Congress’s grandilo-
quence. Requiring subsection (b)(1) to affect the judicial re-
view the Veterans Court provides aligns with the
significance of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule and mitigates
the unique problems that arise in veterans’ cases, including
that veterans are “often unrepresented” before the VA.
Sanders, 556 U. S., at 412. Veterans’ claims also often in-
volve a considerable time lag that produces problems of
proof, since no statute of limitations applies to such claims.
D. Nagin, The Credibility Trap: Notes on a VA Evidentiary
Standard, 45 U. Memphis L. Rev. 887, 894, 898 (2015). An
appeal to the Veterans Court is generally a veteran’s “final
opportunity” to correct the VA’s mistakes. Ante, at 4. Non-
12                  BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

deferential review of the VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determi-
nations plainly minimizes the risk that veterans with bor-
derline claims will be denied benefits to which they are en-
titled.
   Therefore, the veterans canon “garnish[es] an already
solid argument” based on the statute’s text and structure.
Arellano v. McDonough, 598 U. S. 1, 14 (2023). Reading
subsection (b)(1) as a standalone command that requires
the Veterans Court to review the VA’s application of the
benefit-of-the-doubt rule nondeferentially obviously favors
veterans more than an interpretation that reduces the pro-
vision to an exclamation point.
                             III
  The majority does not stop at the mistaken conclusion
that Congress enacted subsection (b)(1) for no reason other
than to reiterate the Veterans Court’s pre-existing statu-
tory duties. It also proceeds to analyze how a challenge to
the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule fares
when filtered through the authority conferred to the Veter-
ans Court in subsection (a). In this regard, the majority
reasons that part—but not all—of the VA’s application of
the benefit-of-the-doubt rule must be reviewed for clear er-
ror. Ante, at 10. But in my view, the Court mischaracter-
izes the “approximate balance” assessment under §5107(b),
which is the part of the analysis that is at issue here. The
majority maintains that that aspect of the benefit-of-the-
doubt rule involves the type of predominately factual find-
ing that appellate courts ordinarily review with deference.
Ante, at 12–13. Stated simply, such is not the case.
                           A
  To understand the majority’s mistake, one must first be
clear eyed about the two steps that are necessary for
the Veterans Court to review the VA’s application of the
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           13

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

benefit-of-the-doubt rule. First, the Veterans Court identi-
fies and reviews the VA’s relevant factual findings concern-
ing the evidence presented. Then, the Veterans Court de-
termines whether, based on the VA’s plausible factual
findings, the “positive and negative evidence” is in “approx-
imate balance” (what I call the approximate-balance stand-
ard).
   All agree that the clear-error standard applies to the VA’s
factual findings regarding the evidence that the Veterans
Court examines at step one. So, for example, the Veterans
Court must accept the VA’s determination that a particular
piece of evidence is reliable or that an individual medical
examiner is qualified, unless those findings are clearly er-
roneous. It is at the second step—when the Veterans Court
determines whether the evidence is in approximate bal-
ance—that questions of law come in.
   At step two, the Veterans Court is essentially being asked
to decide whether a legal standard (“approximate balance”)
has been satisfied on the established facts. As a general
matter, this Court has long treated the application of a legal
standard to a given set of facts as an exercise that poses a
legal question. See, e.g., Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr, 589
U. S. 221, 227–228 (2020). What the majority misses in its
effort to shoehorn §5107(b)’s approximate-balance inquiry
into the question-of-fact category is the true nature of
that assessment, as well as the fact that making the
approximate-balance determination is more nuanced than
simply weighing the evidence on hand.
   For one thing, the court must have a standard for decid-
ing when the evidence before it is in “approximate balance”
as a matter of law. In our common-law legal system, devis-
ing that standard happens over time, on a case-by-case ba-
sis. Therefore, applying it might well involve examining
Veterans Court precedents concerning the meaning of “ap-
proximate balance,” as well as past cases that establish
14                    BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                      JACKSON, J., dissenting

when and under what circumstances certain kinds of evi-
dence will be found to qualify. One can easily imagine a
body of case law developing to illuminate the substantive
and procedural contours of the approximate-balance in-
quiry and the factors that are to be considered. Thus, ap-
plying §5107(b)’s “approximate balance” test is in no way
akin to “finding” a “material fact” that is ultimately subject
to subsection (a)(4)’s clear-error review, as even the Govern-
ment appeared to concede at oral argument. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 59. Rather, application of the “approximate balance”
test presents a “classic mixed question of law” that requires
applying a “legal standard” to “historical facts.” Ibid.
   Where Congress has not prescribed a standard of review
for evaluating a mixed question, the appropriate degree of
deference reflects “the nature of the mixed question” and
“which kind of court . . . is better suited to resolve it.” U. S.
Bank N. A. v. Village at Lakeridge, LLC, 583 U. S. 387, 395
(2018) (citing Miller v. Fenton, 474 U. S. 104, 114 (1985)).
In general, trial courts’ “expertise” as factfinders justifies
deference to their factual determinations. Anderson v. Bes-
semer City, 470 U. S. 564, 574–575 (1985). For this reason,
appellate courts “usually” review with deference mixed
questions that require resolving “case-specific factual is-
sues.” U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 396. But, as I have already
explained, that is not what is happening here.
   Even if the majority is correct to assume that §5107(b)’s
“approximate balance” standard calls for a mere head-to-
head weighing of the positive and negative evidence, that is
still an insufficient basis upon which to rest the majority’s
clear-error conclusion, because deference is “not always”
given regarding such fact-specific inquiries. Ibid., n. 4.
There are circumstances where de novo review is appropri-
ate “even when answering a mixed question primarily in-
volves plunging into a factual record.” Ibid.
   Consider one common example. Whether probable cause
                     Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)                    15

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

existed to support a search or seizure in the Fourth Amend-
ment context is a mixed question of law and fact that appel-
late courts review de novo. Ornelas v. United States,
517 U. S. 690, 696–699 (1996). And review of probable-
cause determinations proceeds in two steps, just like the
approximate-balance inquiry. At step one, the appellate
court identifies the relevant historical facts and reviews
them for clear error. Id., at 696–697, 699. At step two, the
court decides whether an objectively reasonable police of-
ficer would believe that those facts establish probable cause
to search. Id., at 696–697. The second step is a legal ques-
tion that asks whether the facts satisfy a legal standard.
Ibid.
   Another highly fact-sensitive inquiry is whether evidence
presented at trial is sufficient to support a verdict—and ap-
pellate courts review that determination de novo as well. In
a civil case, the trial court may grant judgment to a moving
party as a matter of law after the nonmoving “party has
been fully heard on an issue during a jury trial,” if it “finds
that a reasonable jury would not have a legally sufficient
evidentiary basis to find for the party on that issue.” Fed.
Rule Civ. Proc. 50(a)(1). When making this decision, the
trial judge determines whether, reviewing the facts in the
light most favorable to the nonmovant, the evidence is suf-
ficient to meet the applicable evidentiary standard. Reeves
v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U. S. 133, 150
(2000); see also 9B C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice
and Procedure §2524 (3d ed. 2008) (explaining that the
sufficiency-of-the-evidence inquiry is a legal question deter-
mined by the court). And, on appeal, the reviewing court
undertakes the same sufficiency analysis by evaluating the
evidence without any deference to the trial court’s determi-
nation. Ibid.; see also Reeves, 530 U. S., at 150.3
——————
  3 In criminal cases, too, whether evidence is legally sufficient to sup-

port a conviction is reviewed de novo, considering the evidence in the
16                      BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                        JACKSON, J., dissenting

  These examples demonstrate that nondeferential appel-
late review of factbound legal issues is not unprecedented.
And under §7261(b)(1), the Veterans Court must follow
suit. Section 7261(b)(1) directs the Veterans Court to eval-
uate the VA’s approximate-balance decisions by first ac-
cepting the agency’s not-clearly-erroneous factual findings
about the evidence presented and then determining
whether that evidence satisfies the approximate-balance
standard, without deference to the VA’s own conclusions.
This analysis—which “has both legal and factual compo-
nents,” ante, at 11—is plainly analogous to the sufficiency-
of-evidence and probable-cause questions that appellate
courts regularly review de novo.
                               B
   The majority dismisses these compelling parallels on the
grounds that assessing the sufficiency of the evidence or de-
termining the existence of probable cause are more “legal”
than the approximate-balance inquiry. Ante, at 14–15. The
majority further emphasizes that evaluating whether the
evidence is approximately balanced for §5107(b) purposes
is a “fact intensive” inquiry that is better left to the “tribu-
nal below” than the appeals court. Ante, at 12–13. It also
unfurls a surplusage argument of its own: If de novo review
applies to the VA’s approximate-balance determination, the
majority says, then subsection (b)(1) is superfluous under
petitioners’ interpretation because that determination
“would have been subject to de novo review even before the
enactment of §7261(b)(1).” Ante, at 16.
   None of this reasoning is persuasive. To start, the major-
ity’s efforts to distinguish sufficiency and probable-cause
review from the approximate-balance inquiry fall flat. For
example, according to the majority, the probable-cause in-
quiry is distinguishable because reviewing courts assess
——————
light most favorable to the prosecution. Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S.
307, 318–319 (1979).
                  Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)            17

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

probable cause from the standpoint of an objectively reason-
able officer, and courts are required to consider and “refine
over time” what a “hypothetical person” would deem rea-
sonable as a matter of law. Ante, at 14. The majority says
that sufficiency challenges likewise require courts to use a
“legal lens, applying a hypothetical, objective standard”—
i.e., what a reasonable jury could find. Ante, at 15.
   But the approximate-balance inquiry is not meaningfully
different.     Before the Veterans Court can determine
whether the VA erred in deciding that the positive and neg-
ative evidence is not in “approximate balance,” it must first
have an understanding of what “balanced” evidence looks
like in this context. Identifying “balance” might involve a
hypothetical and objective examination of the evidence—
just like a review of the sufficiency of the evidence or prob-
able cause. Imagine two doctors testify in favor of a claim-
ant’s diagnosis and two doctors testify against it. Does the
mere fact that the same number of witnesses are presented
on both sides mean that the evidence is “balanced,” as a le-
gal matter? The Veterans Court would need to develop a
legal rule to decide. It would also need to decide how the
quality of the evidence factors in: What if one of the doctors
is the Nobel laureate who discovered the condition at issue
while others are recent medical-school graduates? Does the
testimony of a doctor who has examined the claimant bal-
ance evenly against one who has not?
   It is thus quite likely that legal standards will need to be
developed to govern the assessment of “approximate bal-
ance”—which is why the majority is wrong to contend that
resolving approximate-balance challenges will rarely pro-
duce generally applicable precedents. Ibid. Regardless, the
mere fact that the assignment here involves a fact-intensive
and “multi-faceted” decision—such that “ ‘one determina-
tion will seldom be a useful “precedent” for another’ ”—
should not impede our recognition of the significant ques-
tions of law that are embedded in the application of the
18                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

approximate-balance standard. Ornelas, 517 U. S., at 698;
see also Dupree v. Younger, 598 U. S. 729, 734 (2023) (ob-
serving that sufficiency challenges “depend on . . . the
facts”).
   The majority’s attempt to distinguish probable cause
from the approximate-balance standard because the latter
is “a creature of statute,” ante, at 15, is similarly off base.
To be sure, application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not
constitutional in nature. But this principle is not a mere
statutory creation, either—it predates §5107(b) and in fact
“dates back to the post-Civil War era.” Ante, at 3 (citing 50
Fed. Reg. 34454 (1985)); see also, e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 387,
46th Cong., 3d Sess., 132–133 (1881) (testimony of a Bureau
of Pensions physician explaining that when the evidence
left “room for doubt” regarding the extent of a veteran’s dis-
ability, the practice was to “give him the benefit of the
doubt” if “he appear[ed] like an honest man”). In any event,
the majority does not explain why the statutory-versus-
constitutional distinction has any rational bearing on the
amount of deference the Veterans Court owes to the VA’s
benefit-of-the-doubt determinations.
   Speaking of statutes, it is also significant that, under the
judicial review scheme Congress has crafted for veterans’
benefits claims, the Veterans Court is no ordinary appellate
tribunal. The thrust of the majority’s reasoning seems to
be that, as an “appellate court,” the Veterans Court should
do what appeals courts typically do: defer to the lower tri-
bunal’s assessment of these “ ‘case-specific factual issues.’ ”
Ante, at 13. But the “contrast between ordinary civil litiga-
tion” and the statutory requirements for adjudicating vet-
erans’ benefits claims “could hardly be more dramatic.”
Henderson, 562 U. S., at 440.
   To begin, the institutional advantages that generally
warrant deference to trial courts on factual issues do not
exist in this context, because the final decisionmaker for the
VA—the Board of Veterans’ Appeals—is itself an appellate
                 Cite as: 604 U. S. ____ (2025)           19

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

body. See id., at 431 (citing §§7101, 7104(a)). What is more,
the Veterans Court is “an Article I tribunal” that Congress
placed within “a unique administrative scheme.” Id., at
437–438. Such tribunals often develop “special ‘expertise’ ”
that guides them “ ‘in making complex determinations in a
specialized area of the law.’ ” Sanders, 556 U. S., at 412.
And that is particularly true of the Veterans Court, which
regularly reviews “case-specific raw material” in veterans’
cases. Ibid. This feature distinguishes the Veterans Court
from Article III appellate courts because it gives that court
the “experience” and “expertise,” Anderson, 470 U. S., at
574, that “enabl[e] it to make empirically based” judgments
on fact-specific issues, Sanders, 556 U. S., at 412—such as
whether the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies.
  Considering these unique features of the Veterans Court
and the legal landscape in which it operates, there is good
reason to believe that the Veterans Court is actually “better
suited to resolve” the approximate-balance inquiry than the
VA itself. U. S. Bank, 583 U. S., at 395. This is especially
so given the need for fairness and consistency in the appli-
cation of the “approximate balance” standard.
  Thus, even though review of the VA’s approximate-
balance determination requires applying a legal standard
to a set of facts, the Veterans Court is well equipped to do
so, and de novo review of the VA’s determination best pro-
motes the “sound administration of justice.” Miller, 474
U. S., at 114. In concluding otherwise, the majority mini-
mizes the “singular characteristics” of the review scheme at
issue, Henderson, 562 U. S., at 440, and disregards Con-
gress’s choice to task the Veterans Court with ensuring that
the VA complies with the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
  Finally, because §7261(a) unquestionably authorizes
de novo review of questions of law, the majority contends
that applying de novo review to the VA’s approximate-
balance determinations would render subsection (b)(1) su-
perfluous. Ante, at 16. But that reasoning assumes that it
20                   BUFKIN v. COLLINS

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

was always clear that an approximate-balance challenge
raises a legal question (an assumption belied by the very
holding that the majority announces today). Quite to the
contrary, before Congress enacted subsection (b)(1) to re-
quire that the Veterans Court “take due account” of the
VA’s benefit-of-the-doubt determinations, that court—erro-
neously, in my view—reviewed benefit-of-the-doubt chal-
lenges with deference. See supra, at 3–4, 10. Properly un-
derstood, subsection (b)(1) accomplishes the clear and
important mission of abrogating the Federal Circuit and
Veterans Court cases requiring such deference. The major-
ity simply ignores this point. See ante, at 16–17.
                         *     *     *
   In response to complaints that the Veterans Court was
not doing enough to ensure that the VA was, in fact, giving
the benefit of the doubt to veterans, Congress inserted into
a demonstrably pro-claimant administrative scheme the re-
quirement that the Veterans Court “take due account” of
the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
§7261(b)(1). The reading that the majority adopts today re-
duces that provision to a rhetorical flourish and all but en-
sures that the Veterans Court will continue rubberstamp-
ing the VA’s application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.
   If the majority’s holding is correct, then “Congress went
through an awful lot to achieve relatively little.” Wilkinson
v. Garland, 601 U. S. 209, 227 (2024) (JACKSON, J., concur-
ring in judgment). The far better reading of this statute—
one that fully comports with the text, structure, context,
history, and purpose of the provision Congress wrote—is
that the Veterans Court must review without deference the
VA’s approximate-balance determination, and thereby fully
assess that agency’s compliance with Congress’s com-
mands.