ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. robert
, 2025 oncj 518
date:
2025 10 03
court
file no.:  oshawa 24 28106537
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
zachary robert
before
justice joseph hanna
reasons
for sentence released on october 3, 2025
l. dayananthan
.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
k.
manitius……
………………………………………………………………..for the accused
hanna j.:
introduction
zachary robert entered a police station and fired
an airsoft gun multiple times towards officers, hitting one. he wanted the
police to kill him.
mr. robert has pleaded guilty to the following
criminal
code
offences arising from this incident:
o
using an imitation
firearm while committing an indictable offence, contrary s. 85(2)(a);
o
possession of a
weapon for a dangerous purpose, contrary to s. 88(1);
o
assault with a
weapon on police constable lang, contrary to s. 270.01(1)(a);
o
assault with a weapon
on police constable vavasour, contrary to s. 270(1)(a);
o
pointing a firearm
at police constable vavasour, contrary to s. 87(1); and
o
pointing a
firearm at carolyn venedam, contrary to s. 87(1).
the crown seeks a sentence of 18 months custody, followed by two
years’ probation. additionally, the crown requests a dna order and a weapons
prohibition.
the defence submits that the appropriate sentence in this case is
a conditional sentence of two years less credit for pre-sentence custody and
bail conditions. the defence does not oppose the probation term or the
ancillary orders sought by the crown.
the circumstances
of the offences
on july 27, 2024, zachary robert entered the police station lobby
with an authentic looking black airsoft handgun.
he pointed the weapon at officers, and a civilian staff member,
ms. venedam. he fired multiple rounds, striking police constable vavasour in
the leg, who sustained a minor injury. fortunately, officers present quickly
realized that the weapon mr. robert was carrying was a pellet gun.
mr. robert retreated into a washroom and demanded to be shot.
officers used a taser to subdue him and then arrested him. he suffered a
fractured nose during the arrest and was hospitalized.
prior to the incident, mr. robert sent a text to his girlfriend
and parents with a photo of the gun, stating he intended to provoke police into
shooting him. his mother alerted police dispatch, but the warning did not reach
the division in time.
the airsoft gun used during the offences was seized and tested. while
it is not considered a firearm for the purposes of offences listed in
s. 84(3)
of the
criminal code
it does qualify as a firearm in relation to the offence
of pointing a firearm because it falls within the second category of barreled
objects described in
r. v. dunn
,
2013 onca 539
, at para.
45
, aff'd
2014
scc 69
. mr. robert’s guilty plea to using an imitation firearm while committing
an indictable offence is not inconsistent with this fact because a real firearm
meets the definition of an imitation firearm for the purposes of
s. 85(2)
of
the
criminal code
:
r. v. scott
,
2000 bcca 220
, aff’d
2001 scc 73
.
facts
relating to the offender
mr.
robert is 30 years old. he was 29 at the time he committed these offences. he
has no criminal record.
he was
raised in a financially secure household in a nice scarborough neighbourhood,
surrounded by a supportive family. while growing up he played sports and
attended various camps.
mr.
robert advised the pre-sentence report author that he experienced difficulties
in middle school but that “he simmered down” once his hormones “simmered down.”
he did not have many friends during junior school or high school, though he
developed two close friendships.
while
in high school, he earned academic awards and made honour roll twice despite
having a learning disability. his family asserts that he was misdiagnosed as
gifted by a psychiatrist who has lost her licence for having made fraudulent
assessments. he completed high school and earned certificates from durham
college for electrical techniques and animal care. he is currently enrolled in
a business accounting program at durham college.
he has
held a variety of jobs, beginning with roles as a paper boy and camp
counsellor. he also worked at a furniture manufacturer, a pet store, and a
gaming store. he has held multiple positions relating to animal care. since
january 2024, he has been employed at kingfisher international as an animal
care attendant. following his arrest, he took a leave of absence but resumed
his duties after his bail conditions were varied.
mr.
robert was in a romantic relationship between july 14, 2023 and july 26, 2024.
he and his partner lived at his parents’ home between march and may 2024 and
then in a basement apartment between june and july 2024. he described the
relationship as toxic and emotionally draining. he advised that it led to
multiple suicide attempts. mr. robert became disconnected from his family while
in this relationship.
he was
diagnosed with attention deficit disorder in 2007, autism spectrum disorder and
social anxiety disorder in 2014, and major depressive disorder in 2020.
the
defence filed a psychological assessment summary prepared by dr. matteo renelli
in relation to an assessment of mr. robert performed in december 2014. it
indicates at that time mr. robert underwent a comprehensive psychological
assessment over two days. he was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and
found to have deficits in social communication and interaction. he was found to
present with patterns of repetitive behaviours and restricted interests. for
example, he was said to have a strong adherence to routine and difficulty with
transitions.
mr. robert’s
family physician, doctor edison susman, testified at the sentencing hearing and
submitted two letters detailing his care of mr. robert. according to dr.
susman, mr. robert's depression and anxiety significantly worsened after 2020,
primarily due to an inability to resolve interpersonal conflicts. these issues
were further compounded by a dysfunctional relationship, which left mr. robert
feeling inadequate and insecure, contributing to a deepening of his depressive
symptoms.
dr. susman
indicated that mr. robert attempted suicide on four occasions between september
2023 and july 27, 2024, including during the incident that led to the current
charges.
dr. susman
explained that mr. robert’s ability to deal with life’s stressors is impaired
due to the combined effect of his autism and adhd. mr. robert’s adhd contributes
to impulsive behaviour, which has contributed to mr. robert acting out in self-destructive
ways when overwhelmed. his autism causes emotional dysregulation and difficulty
interpreting social cues, making interpersonal relationships challenging.
dr.
susman indicated that mr. robert’s depression and anxiety symptoms have substantially
improved. he attributes this progress to the adjustment of mr. robert's
medication and his ongoing participation in psychotherapy. mr. robert has
completed a 12-week group dialectic behaviour therapy course and is currently
participating in a therapeutic program to develop coping skills with durham
mental health, and cognitive behavioural therapy.
dr.
susman advised that mr. robert has remained mentally stable since january 2025.
in his opinion, mr. robert does not currently pose a danger to himself or
others. in his view, mr. robert’s prognosis is favourable provided he continue
with his medication and therapy.
the defence also filed a psychiatric consultation note authored
by dr. anjana chawla, dated december 17, 2024. dr. chawla did not observe mr.
robert to demonstrate any psychotic or manic symptoms. he
reported that mr. robert denied any suicidal ideations at the time, and he expressed
remorse regarding the incident giving rise to his charges. the letter notes
that mr. robert was engaged in psychotherapy and proactive in seeking help. dr.
chawla recommended that mr. robert continue with his current combination of
medications and suggested some adjustments in the future may be appropriate. dr.
chawla discharged mr. robert back to dr. susman’s care given that he appeared
to be doing reasonably well.
i received three letters of support for mr.
robert. his parents advise that he had a happy childhood but began to struggle
in the fifth grade. they describe his diagnoses over the years, the social difficulties
he has faced, and mr. robert’s multiple suicide attempts while he was in a
toxic relationship. they also speak to the steps mr. robert has taken to deal
with his mental health struggles and offer their unwavering support for him. victoria
bowkett, a former co-worker and friend describes mr. robert as good worker who
is passionate, caring, and honest. she also indicates that he is remorseful for
his actions. chrystal taylor is a supervisor at kingfisher international where
mr. robert currently works. she has known him for about a year and describes
him as respectful, responsible, punctual, kind and professional.
at his sentencing hearing mr. robert read a
letter expressing remorse for his conduct. he stated that he realizes the
seriousness of his actions and that they caused fear. he explained that he felt
worthless and overwhelmed at the time of the incident. he described the
experience as a wakeup call and advised that he is taking steps to improve
himself. he apologized to those affected by his actions and expressed appreciation
to the officers for apprehending him in a way that resulted in only limited
injuries.
victim
impact
p.c. lang prepared a victim impact statement outlining
the significant physical and emotional consequences he has suffered as a result
of the incident. he was injured during the struggle to subdue and arrest mr.
robert. he woke up the next morning with severe pain in his shoulder and with a
loss of motor function. during the first week following the injury, he collapsed
in pain while doing his prescribed stretches. he has attended physiotherapy appointments
twice a week for several months. he was placed on modified duties which caused
him significant stress because he had been preparing to apply for a use of
force unit – a role which would require him to pass a fitness test. his injury
prevented him from enjoying many outdoor activities during the summer. this
incident impacted him emotionally and psychologically. he has sought assistance
from a psychotherapist. he wrote, “it wasn’t so much the actual incident, but
the fallout and significant impact it had on my personal life that caused me
stress.” six months after the incident, he continued to experience daily discomfort
and pain.
ms. venedam also submitted a victim impact
statement. she described the event which transpired as terrifying. she is
haunted daily by the image of a person entering the police station and pointing
a gun at her. she believed she was going to die that day. she advised that that
while she used to love her job, she now despises it. because of these offences
she suffers from extreme anxiety and has sought psychological help. she explained
that because of the incident she now startles easily, struggles to sleep, and
that her emotional condition has affected her interactions with her family.
general principles
at arriving at a just sanction i am required to prioritize and
blend the objectives enumerated in
s. 718
(a) to (f) of the
criminal code
.
this will involve consideration of the mitigating and aggravating factors, and
regard to the principles of restraint, parity, and totality:
criminal code
, ss. 718.2(b)-(e).
the sentence i ultimately impose “must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender":
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at para.
30
;
criminal
code
, s. 718.1
identifying the aggravating factors
it is impermissible to impose consecutive sentences for multiple
offences and simultaneously treat those offences as aggravating factors in
relation to one another. this is prohibited because it would amount to double
counting:
r. v. bertrand marchand
,
2023 scc 26
, at para.
98
. when concurrent
sentences are imposed, however, it is appropriate to consider the features of
the various offences collectively in assessing the overall seriousness of the
conduct:
r. v. mccue
,
2012 onca 773
, at paras.
21 – 22
;
r. v. fortune
,
2024 onca 269
, at para.
33
;
r. v. charley
,
2025 onsc 2490
, at para.
45
.
pursuant to
ss. 85(4)
and
270.03
of the
criminal code
the sentences
for the use imitation firearm charge and two charges of assaulting a peace
officer with a weapon must be consecutive. accordingly, the elements of these
offences cannot be treated as aggravating factors. i have
decided to make the sentences for the remaining offences concurrent.
i find the following aggravating factors present
in this case.
i)
mr. robert’s conduct involved planning.
ii)
he pointed a firearm at ms. venedam.
iii)
by discharging his weapon multiple times, he exposed others to risk of
injury.
iv)
he created a hazardous scenario that presented a significant
risk of an officer discharging their firearm within a confined space where
people were present:
r. v. maygard
,
2013 abca 214
, at para.
29
;
r. v.
charlette
,
2015 mbca 32
, at para.
47
. the situation he caused was
not only dangerous but could have resulted in lasting psychological trauma to a
peace officer:
r. v. badria
,
2017 onsc 5389
, at para.
38
;
r. v. l.r.
,
2020 bcpc 80
, at para.
47
.
v)
the psychological impact on ms. venedam, along with the physical and
emotional consequences suffered by p.c. lang, were significant.
the mitigating factors
the mitigating circumstance in this case include:
i)
mr. robert has no criminal record.
ii)
he has expressed remorse and accepted responsibility for his actions by
pleading guilty. while the crown’s case was overwhelming, mr. robert’s guilty pleas
saved valuable court resources. moreover, i accept that he is genuinely
remorseful. immediately following the incident, he apologized to the officers
and since then he has expressed regret for his actions to his family, friends,
his doctors, and to the court.
iii)
there was a causal link between mr. robert’s mental illness and his
criminal conduct:
r. v. fabbro
,
2021 onca 494
, at para.
25
. his autism,
adhd, anxiety, and depression contributed to his sense of being overwhelmed and
led him to being suicidal. i also accept that mr. robert’s mental illnesses would
make time in custody more difficult for him:
r. v. dillon
,
2025 onsc
958
, at para.
26
;
r. v. hills
,
2023 scc 2 (s.c.c.)
, at para.
135
.
iv)
mr. robert has strong support and positive rehabilitative potential. he
has taken meaningful steps to address his mental health difficulties, and he
has responded well to therapy and the adjustments in his medications.
furthermore, his family and friends are committed to providing him support in
the community. he also has employment available to him.
v)
mr. robert was subject to restrictive bail conditions. for 206 days he
was on a strict house arrest bail which only permitted him to be outside of his
residence while with his surety. since then, he has been on a curfew for almost
eight months.
collateral consequences
there are multiple collateral consequences mr. robert will face
if incarcerated. i have already mentioned that his mental illnesses would make imprisonment
harder for him. “mental health challenges are relevant collateral consequences
because they increase the severity of incarceration and intensify the impact of
other collateral consequences, which favours a sentence reduction to achieve
proportionality, promote rehabilitation, and protect the public in the
long-term”:
r. v. d.b
.,
2025
onca 577
, at para.
38
. incarceration will have the effect of separating mr.
robert from his family which will undoubtedly cause him and them stress. he could
also lose his job. furthermore, i observe that mr. robert’s nose was broken
while being apprehended. though there is no suggestion the police acted
inappropriately, “there is no requirement that collateral consequences emanate
from state misconduct in order to be considered as a factor at sentencing”:
r.
v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
, at para.
56
. that said, it should also be acknowledged
that mr. robert’s injury flowed from his own conduct:
r. v. aiken
,
2024
onca 32
, at para.
13
. while i take these various collateral consequences into
account, the sentence i impose must remain proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the responsibility of the offender:
r. v. l.c.
,
2022 onca
863
, at para.
24
;
suter
, at paras.
47-49 and 56
.
sentencing precedents
the defence submitted several cases in which conditional
sentences had been imposed in cases involving firearms.
in
r. v. desmond-robinson
,
2022 onca 369
the offender was found guilty of drug offences and possession of a sawed-off
shotgun with readily accessible ammunition. the gun was found in backpack in a
closet and the ammunition was stored in the same closet. the trial judge imposed
a net sentence of 18 months on the firearms charge, and a sentence of time
served on the drug charges. the court of appeal found that the trial judge had
erred in concluding that appellate authority precluded the imposition of a
conditional sentence for a gun offence. the court of appeal varied the sentence
to a 2 year less a day conditional sentence. the offender was 18 years old at
the time of the offence and the court of appeal indicated that his moral
blameworthiness was reduced due to circumstances beyond his control, including
some that reflected systemic racism.
in
r. v. fabbro
,
2021 onca 494
, the offender
pleaded guilty to carrying a weapon for a dangerous purpose, possession of a
prohibited firearm with readily accessible ammunition, and breaches of court
orders. the offences involved a standoff with police during which mr. fabbro
pointed an unloaded gun at himself while in a suicidal state. the sentencing judge
imposed a sentence of two years less a day in prison. the court of appeal
varied the sentence to a conditional sentence. it found that the sentencing
judge erred by not considering that mr. fabbro’s possession of the firearm was for
the purpose of committing suicide and by failing to recognize a causal link
between mr. fabbro’s mental illness and his offences. the court emphasized that
the danger caused by the offender’s conduct was much attenuated. the gun was
not loaded, mr. fabbro repeatedly said he was not going to hurt anyone other
than himself and the officers did not feel threatened. as such, the court
concluded that the primary sentencing objectives were not limited to deterrence
and denunciation but also included rehabilitation.
in
r. v. hussey-rodrigues
,
2024 onsc
2671
, the offender was found guilty of possessing a loaded firearm. though he
pleaded not guilty he did not contest the allegations. officers observed the
offender nearby an address where they were executing a warrant. when he ran,
they gave chase. in the struggle that ensued, a loaded prohibited firearm fell
to the ground. presser j. imposed a conditional sentence of two years less
credit for 24 days time served. while she recognized the danger associated with
mr. hussey-rodrigues’s offence, she noted that he was 18 years old at the time he
committed it, had good prospects for rehabilitation, and had been on restrictive
bail conditions for almost five years at the time of sentencing. presser j. also
took into consideration the substantial collateral consequences present. mr.
hussey-rodrigues was the primary caregiver and effectively a single parent to
his young child who had high needs and developmental issues. the sentencing
judge observed that “it would not be good for this child's well-being or his
development if his father were incarcerated”.
in
r. v. marrier
,
2023 onsc 5194
, the offender
was sentenced to a conditional sentence after pleading guilty to possession of
a loaded prohibited firearm. while being chased by police mr. marrier threw a
satchel containing a loaded gun into a backyard. he was 19 years old at the
time he committed the offence. by the time of his sentencing, he had spent over
4 years on house arrest with electronic monitoring. the sentencing judge found
that there was a connection between mr. marier's life experience with
anti-black racism and his decision to commit the offence.
in
r. v. carter
,
2021 oncj 561
, the offender was sentenced
to an 18-month conditional sentence after pleading guilty to two counts of
importing prohibited firearm parts and possessing a prohibited firearm. mr.
carter had no criminal record and was a 50-year-old college professor. his hobbies
were gun collecting and target shooting. he was licensed to possess a
restricted firearm but not a prohibited firearm. he ordered
two selector switches whose function is to convert a semi-automatic firearm to
fully automatic functionality. the court observed that the offences did not
involve a weapon in a public place, a loaded weapon or any criminality beyond
the conversion to a fully automatic gun. the court also found that likelihood
of recidivism was “virtually inconceivable”.
in
r. v. meinzinger
, the offender was sentenced to a 2 year
less one day conditional sentence for possession of a loaded gun and careless
storage of a firearm. the causal link between the offender’s
mental health issues and his offences played a prominent role in the sentencing
judge’s decision. mr. meinzinger was a lawful gun owner. he left his residence
with a loaded gun and texted his former partner messages expressing suicidal
ideations and implying he intended a suicide by cop scenario. his remaining
guns were left carelessly stored in his home. police stopped the offender’s
vehicle without incident and arrested him. they found the loaded gun in a bag.
in
r. v. vaillant
,
2020 bcsc 1137
, the court imposed a
conditional sentence of two years less one day, less 105 days for time served.
the offender was involved a standoff with police. mr. vaillant committed his
offences while suicidal and attempted to provoke police to shoot him. he
engaged in a police standoff during which he stood outside the
front entry to a cabin and waved a loaded .45-calibre semiautomatic pistol in
the direction of rcmp officers who had arrived. mr. vaillant fired shots while
police were on scene, including into the air, one into a tv inside the cabin,
and another out the open front door of the cabin into the air. while the
offender waved the firearm and his conduct was undoubtedly dangerous, the
sentencing judge noted there was no evidence that the offender pointed the
firearm at anyone (para. 89).
the crown referred me to the decision
r. v.
badria
,
2017 onsc 5389
. mr. badria was convicted of assault causing bodily
harm on a police officer by striking her on the head with a sledgehammer and
numerous other weapon offences arising from the same incident. the offender
entered a police station and swung at an officer with his weapon, fortunately only
striking a “glancing blow.” a struggle with officers ensued during which police
found a knife in mr. badria’s pocket. mr. badria was schizophrenic and had been
attempting to commit “suicide by cop.” he had a dated criminal record for
criminal harassment and failing to comply with probation. the victim suffered
relatively minor physical injuries which likely occurred during the struggle
with mr. badria. she was severely traumatized by the incident, however, and
developed post-traumatic stress disorder. the court accepted that mr. badria’s
mental illness played an important role in the commission of his offences, that
he had remorse and had potential for rehabilitation. mr. badria was sentenced
to a further 18 months in prison after having received credit for 3 years and 9
months of pre-sentence custody.
another case i reviewed was
r. v. takazo
,
2017 nwtsc 81
. mr.
takazo pleaded guilty to possessing a firearm while prohibited and pointing a
firearm at a peace officer. he was suicidal and intoxicated at the time he
committed his offences. he waved a firearm around while yelling that he needed
help. he pointed the gun at himself and at a police truck where officers were. he
continued to put the gun under his chin and yelled at the officers to take him
out before eventually raising his arms in the air. mr. takazo had a prior
record for an incident involving the discharge of a firearm. he suffered from a
mental illness for which he had taken antipsychotic medication in the past. he
was indigenous. he had attended a residential school, and both his parents were
residential school survivors. the sentencing judge observed that “an attempt to
force a police officer to use their weapon is basically an attempt to terrify
another human being into taking a life”. mr. takazo was sentenced to 18 months
imprisonment.
while attempting to achieve parity is a desirable objective, sentencing
is a highly individualized process. accordingly, sentencing
ranges are meant to be seen as “primarily guidelines, and not hard and fast
rules”:
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
, at paras.
58 and 60
.
the
appropriate sentences in this case
there are significant mitigating circumstances and collateral
consequences in this case which make rehabilitation and restraint important
considerations. the causal connection between mr. robert’s mental illness and
his offences, his support in the community, his rehabilitative progress, and
his expressions of remorse all substantially mitigate the sentence which would
otherwise be appropriate in a case involving this type of conduct. in
sentencing mr. robert i must exercise restraint particularly given his relative
youth, his lack of a criminal record, and the collateral consequences at play.
s. 718.02
of the
criminal code
directs that the court give
primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence when
imposing a sentence for the offences of assaulting a peace officer with a
weapon. “police officers hold positions for the protection of the public and
are exposed to frequent and significant dangers in the course of their work”:
r v. lamar
,
2017 bcca 228
, at para.
27
.
the role of deterrence is tempered in the
circumstances of this case given the role mr. robert’s mental health issues
played in his offences. while these issues reduce to some extent the level of
denunciation required, i find that denunciation is still a predominant objective
in this case. this is not a situation such as in
fabbro
where the danger
of the offender’s conduct was much attenuated. mr. robert’s conduct was very
dangerous. moreover, his offences have significantly impacted two victims.
a conditional sentence is a legally available
sanction for the offences mr. robert is being sentenced. the requirement for
consecutive sentences does not preclude the imposition of multiple conditional
sentences so long as the total sentence does not exceed two years:
r. v.
frechette
(2001)
2001 mbca 66 (canlii)
, 154 c.c.c. (3d) 191 (man. c.a.).
the crown does not seek a sentence of more than
two years. furthermore, i am satisfied that mr. robert serving a sentence in
the community would not endanger the safety of the community.
i recognize that a conditional sentence with
punitive conditions can address the objectives of deterrence and denunciation:
r.
v. proulx
2000 scc 5
at paras.
21 and 22
. having given the matter much
consideration, i find that a conditional sentence
would
not be proportionate, given the gravity of the offences committed by mr. robert
and his degree of responsibility. i therefore find that it would be inconsistent
with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
mr. robert is being sentenced for multiple
offences, some of which require consecutive sentences. the principle of
totality requires i ensure that the cumulative sentence imposed does not exceed
the overall culpability of the offender:
r. v. m. (c.a.),
1 s.c.r. 500,
at para. 42
;
criminal code
, s. 718.2(c).
having regard to all the circumstances, i have determined that the
total appropriate sentence in this case before credit for pre-sentence custody
and time spent on bail is one year imprisonment. mr. robert spent 6 days in
pre-sentence detention, for which he is entitled to 9 days credit. while
downes
credit is generally conceptualized as a mitigating factor, it is not
necessarily inappropriate to grant numerical credit “so long as it does not skew
the calculation of the ultimate sentence”:
r. v. lowe
,
2025 onca 475
, at para.
17
;
r. v. joseph
,
2020 onca 733
, at
paras.
107-8
, 112-4. in this case, i have decided to credit mr. robert 2 ½
months for his time spent on bail. the total remaining sentence to be served is
therefore 9 months and 6 days.
the sentence is broken down as follows:
•
count 1 – use imitation firearm: 3 months and 6 days, in addition
to 6 days’ time served to be credited for 9 days.
•
count 4 – assault with a weapon on p.c. lang: 3 months
consecutive.
•
count 6 – possession of a weapon for a dangerous purpose: 3
months
concurrent
.
•
count 8 – point firearm at pc vavasour: 3 months
concurrent.
•
count 9 – assault with a weapon on pc vavasour: 3 months
consecutive.
•
count 10 – point firearm at ms. venedam: 3 months
concurrent
.
following his release from custody mr. robert will be placed on
probation for a period of two years with the following terms:
•
in addition to the statutory terms, he is to report to a
probation officer within 2 days of his release and thereafter as directed.
•
he is to cooperate with his probation officer, including by
signing any releases necessary to monitor his compliance with any condition on
this order.
•
he is to attend and actively participate in all assessment,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed by the probation officer and
complete them to the satisfaction of the probation officer for including, but
not limited to:
o
stress
management and psychological issues.
•
he shall sign any release of information forms as will enable his
probation officer to monitor his attendance and completion of any assessments,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
•
he shall provide proof of his attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
•
he shall not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
,
including any firearm or imitation firearms.
i also make an order that mr. robert provide a sample of his dna.
furthermore, pursuant to
s. 109
of the
criminal code
, there will be a
weapons prohibition for 5 years.
the victim fine surcharge is waived in all the circumstances.
released:  october 3, 2025.
signed:
justice joseph hanna