ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. d.p.,
2025 oncj 573
date:
2025 11 03
court
file no.:  24 y4810514
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
dp, a young
person
before
justice c. faria
heard
on july 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25, 2025
oral
reasons october 9, 2025
written
reasons released november 3, 2025
pamela santoro & leanna guzzo.................................................. counsel
for the crown
heather gunter & annamaria enejajor ............................. counsel
for the accused dp
faria j.:
i.
introduction
dp was charged with sexually assaulting ml during
a sleepover on her 16
th
birthday, contrary to
s. 271
of the
criminal
code
.
he was 15 years old at the time. the crown proceeded by indictment.
the crown called the complainant and two witnesses.
dp testified in his own defence.
i found dp not guilty of the charge on october
9, 2025, and provided some oral reasons with fulsome written reasons to follow.
these are my written reasons.
ii.
summary of the evidence
ml evidence
on the evening of january 19, 2024, ml and a group
her friends went to ez’s house for her birthday. in total, the group of 8, consisted
of 7 girls, including ml, and dp was the only boy. ez’s house is a 4-storey
townhouse in the north part of the city. the 2
nd
floor has two
bedrooms, ez’s and her sister’s room, as well as a bathroom. ez’s parent’s
bedroom is on the 3
rd
floor. ez’s mother was home working in the
basement that night.
ml, now 17 years old, testified the group arrived
at ez’s house at about 7:00 or 7:30 p.m. and went to ez’s room. the decision to
sleep over had already been made. they all played games; listened to music; drank
from one bottle of dark alcohol, which she thinks was whiskey; and went outside
to smoke weed. she saw her close friend dp drink and smoke weed too. she also
thought he was on acid due to his behaviour on the bus when they travelled to
ez’s house.
ml testified she drank about 5 or 6 shots, and
after smoking weed, got drowsy and did not feel well. she went to the bathroom
and thought she was going to throw up. she described herself as very drunk. she
asked for help. one friend, who she thinks was im, held her hair. im and ez
helped her to ez’s sister’s room where there were two beds, and she went to
sleep.
ml testified that p, another close friend, was
drunk too. p passed out on the same bed as her, closer to the wall. at some
point, she knew that im went to sleep in the second bed in the room.
ml testified she was sleeping, her head facing
the wall, when she woke up to a jabbing pain in her butt, specifically her
anus. she felt penetration. ml testified, “i cannot say a hundred percent, but
what it felt like and what i can say this: it was his genitals…his penis.” she
turned around and saw dp lying on the bed behind her. she said to him: “what
are you doing?” dp said nothing. his mouth was open. he looked shocked,
surprised, and scared. he got up and walked out of the room fast. he was holding
his pants and did not have time to pull them up.  her own underwear and pyjama
pants were pulled down to the middle of her thighs.
ml testified dp was one of her best and closest
friends at the time. she was confused and in denial. she saw p sleeping in the
bed with her but did not wake her up. she tried to go back to sleep and did. she
felt some pain when she woke up. she did not see dp until the next morning.
in cross-examination, ml confirmed that when she
gave her statement 3 ½ weeks after the sleepover, she told police she was not
“100% sure” about what happened. she testified that she meant she was not sure
what
to do
about what happened, as she was close to dp and understood the
seriousness of the allegations. she confirmed that, at the time she spoke to
police, she said in her statement, “you can tell something happened. and you
don’t know what it is.  that’s why like i wasn’t a hundred percent sure.” that
was one of the reasons she clarified some of the timelines with her friends in
the morning.
she agreed she consulted her friends about where
dp was after she went to sleep, where he went to sleep, what he did, and the
times that her friends saw him.
ez evidence
ez, 17, testified she went to ml’s house at
about 5 p.m. that day with a group of friends to celebrate ml’s birthday. the
group of 8 ended up at ez’s house at about 10 p.m. they all slept over, as
invited to by her mother.
ez confirmed:
•
everyone hung out her room on the second floor. she
only smoked weed. all the others both drank alcohol and smoked weed, including
ml and dp.
•
ml was “pretty intoxicated” before midnight and
was the first one in bed. she and im helped ml from the bathroom to her
sister’s room. they put her on one of the two double beds in the room.
•
she did the same thing for p shortly thereafter,
who was also very drunk. p was put in the same bed as ml, but closer to the
wall.
•
she noticed dp was both intoxicated and high, as
he could not hold a spoon properly when he was eating cereal.
ez testified dp was the 3
rd
person to
go to bed. he slept on the edge of her bed in her room on the 2
nd
floor. from around midnight to till 3 a.m., the girls who were awake went up to
her parents’ room on the 3
rd
floor.
while they were hanging out on the 3
rd
floor, at some point, ez went into her room while dp was sleeping and took his phone.
she and im took selfies on his phone to prank him. dp was asleep when she put
dp’s phone on her dresser in her room. at some point, dp also came up to the 3
rd
floor wearing leggings and asking where his pants were. the girls said they did
not know. she assumed dp went back to her room to sleep.
ez testified she went to bed at 3:00 a.m. in the
second bed with im, in the same room as ml and p who were asleep at the time.
they were in the same position she had left them in.  at 6 a.m., ml woke ez up
and told her dp had done something to her.
im evidence
im
,
also 17 years old, testified:
•
she went to ez’s house to celebrate ml’s
birthday
•
she thought she would go home after, but ez’s
mother invited the group to sleep over as it was late, and they did.
•
most of the teens drank alcohol and smoked weed
including herself, but she did not know how much each person drank or smoked,
and what they were drinking.
•
ml became “pretty drunk,” went to the bathroom,
got sick, and she and ez helped put her in bed in ez’s sister’s room around
11:30 p.m.
•
p was drunk too and went to sleep next to ml on
the same bed, but closer to the wall and ml closer to the door.
•
im went to check on ml a few times after.
im also testified that:
•
she hung out with the other girls in the 3
rd
floor bedroom, and at one point dp came up to the 3
rd
floor asked if
anyone had seen his pants.
•
she estimated that dp was downstairs on the 2
nd
floor alone for a “good chunk of time,” though she does not know how long.
•
she could not remember when she went to bed, but
believes she was the 3
rd
person to go to sleep.
•
she slept in the second bed in the same room
where ml and p were sleeping.
•
ez joined her in bed sometime later.
•
she never saw dp go into the room ml was
sleeping in.
•
ml woke her up around 6 a.m. and told her dp had
done something to her.
dp evidence
dp testified to much of the same narrative as
that of ml, ez, and im, but with more detail about some particulars. he was 15
at the time of the allegation and is now 17 years old.
he testified that p invited him to join the
group of girls to celebrate ml’s birthday. school let out at 3 p.m. and the
group, including 2 other boys, went to withrow park which is close to his
school in riverdale. he remembers they hung out at their usual spot for about
an hour. the two other boys left because they lived close by, and the group
went to ml’s house around 5 p.m. for her to grab something but they lingered. he
thinks they may have gone downtown because he remembers being at a subway
station that he associates with the eaton centre.
the decision to go to ez’s house was made at the
broadview subway station, which he remembers because he was looking at a
hospital sign close by. dp testified that when he looked at his phone, it was
10 p.m. his curfew was 11:30 p.m.; he had to decide whether he was going to
make curfew and walk home, which was 10 minutes away, or go to ez’s house. he
was having a good time, so he went with the group.
he believes they arrived at ez’s house at 11
p.m., and he thought it was far and in an unfamiliar area. once there, he
introduced himself to her mother, and the group went to ez’s room. they drank,
and he specifically remembers drinking fireball. he had 7 to 10 sips from the
bottle. there were 3 or 4 types of alcohol in ez’s room.
dp testified that around 11:30 p.m., he was looking
for someone to go home with as he was scared that he would get lost if he left
alone; however, no one was leaving. shortly thereafter, ez’s mother suggested
they all sleep over. he texted his parents and they said he could stay.
dp saw ml drinking, and not feel well. he saw her
in the bathroom. he saw ez and im help ml to ez’s sister’s room. he cannot
remember if they all went to the balcony to smoke weed before or after ml was
put to bed. the weed was his. they smoked it from ez’s bong.
dp testified things started to slow down when he
was in ez’s room with c. and d. he was scrolling on his phone, then went to
sleep c. and d. were still in the room.  he woke up about an hour later, drank
some soda water, and did not see his cargo pants on the floor by the bed where
he had put them. he went to the 3
rd
floor where he heard voices and
asked ez, c., and d. if they had seen his pants. they said they had not. he
went back to bed.
dp testified he was the last one to wake up the
next day. neither c. nor d. were in the room. he drank soda water and threw up
right after in the room. later, he found his pants hanging on the shelf. he
texted his parents to pick him up and they did.
dp testified he did not go into the room where
ml was sleeping. he did not get into the bed with her. he did put his penis in
her anus. he did not sexually assault her.
iii.
legal principles
as in every criminal case, dp is presumed innocent. the burden
rests on the crown to prove each essential element of the offence beyond a
reasonable doubt. the burden never shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based on
reason and common sense from the evidence or lack of evidence.
when considering the credibility and reliability
of a witness, i may accept some, none, or all of a witness’ evidence.
credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth. reliability
relates to the actual accuracy of the testimony. the credibility and
reliability of a witness must be “tested in the light of all the other evidence
presented.”
in this case, i am mindful that the witnesses are
still not yet adults and are testifying about the sleepover that happened when
they were all in their mid-teens. though the standard of proof remains the
same, the supreme court of canada established a “common sense approach” to
assessing the credibility and reliability of children that recognizes their
developmental stage in life. the assessment must reference their mental
development, understanding, and ability to communicate. absolute precision as
to the details of an alleged offence is unrealistic and unnecessary.
as dp testified, the applicable analytical framework is that of
w.(d.).
i.
if i accept dp’s the evidence, i must acquit him.
ii.
even if i do not accept dp’s evidence, i must acquit him if his evidence
raises a reasonable doubt.
iii.
even if i do not accept dp’s evidence, nor does it raise a reasonable
doubt, i must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt the crown has proven every
element of the offence on the totality of the evidence i do accept.
i instruct myself not to approach the evidence
with unwarranted assumptions as to what is or is not sexual assault, what is or
is not consent, or what kind of person may or may not be a complainant of
sexual assault. i also instruct myself not to make unwarranted assumptions on
the kind of person who may or may not commit a sexual assault, or what a person
who is being, or has been, sexually assaulted will or will not do or say.
there is no typical victim or typical assailant or typical situation or typical
reaction.
iv.
position of the parties
ms. guzzo for the crown submitted ml is both a
credible and reliable witness, unshaken on the core of the allegation. the
evidence of the 3 witnesses who were with ml and dp that evening support the
main elements of ml’s narrative, though they were not present during the actual
event in dispute. she submitted the court should reject dp’s evidence as it
does not raise a reasonable doubt; instead, the court should accept ml’s
evidence and find dp guilty of sexual assault.
ms. enejajor for the defence submitted ml is
unreliable. she submitted that while ml appeared to genuinely believe her
allegation, she was vague, inconsistent regarding the surrounding events and very
intoxicated at the time.  she submitted that dp’s evidence that no sexual
activity occurred be accepted, and if not accepted, it raises a reasonable
doubt, and the court should acquit dp.
v.
analysis
on the charge
of sexual assault, the crown must prove the following beyond a reasonable
doubt: dp touched ml directly or indirectly; he touched her intentionally; the
touching took place in circumstances of a sexual nature; dp did not consent to
the sexual activity in question; and dp knew that ml did not consent to the
sexual activity in question.
there is no dispute that if i find dp did get
into bed with ml while she slept, lay behind her and inserted his penis into
her anus, the crown has proven all the elements of the charge.
the issue is whether ml’s evidence is
sufficiently reliable to be accepted beyond a reasonable doubt, and whether
dp’s evidence raised a reasonable doubt.
ml is clearly bad with time. she believes she
arrived at ez’s house at 7:00 or 7:30 p.m., while everyone else agreed it was
much later in the evening, at 10:00 or 11:00 p.m. she testified she was the
last to wake up in the morning around 10:00 or 11:00 a.m., but ez and im
testify she woke them up at 6:00 a.m. ml does not remember where she was before
she went to ez’s house, but ez and dp testify they were at her house. ml firmly
believed the plan was to sleep over at ez’s, but ez, im, and dp all say the
decision was made at ez’s house because it was late and ez’s mother invited
them to stay the night. ml testified dp was wearing skinny jeans at that time
of the assault, but ez and dp testified he was wearing leggings during that time.
ml told police she was lying on her side facing the wall, but testified she was
on her stomach with her head facing the wall.
however, i find none of these inconsistencies
cause me concern. they are peripheral and minor. the timeline of earlier events,
such as when decisions were made and what time people woke up, are not core
issues—especially for young people testifying about an event over a year and
half ago.
in addition, all the witnesses were clearly intoxicated,
or high, or both. skinny jeans and leggings can easily be mistaken for each
other. whether ml was on her side or stomach is of no importance. she was
facing away, and dp was behind her. that did not change.
the key issue is the assessment of the
reliability of the 2 minutes that constitute the offence.
ml testified candidly. she easily acknowledged
when she could not remember, when she said something different in her two police
statements vis-à-vis her evidence, and she credibly explained several such
differences. she apologized for not remembering or if she misspoke.
there is no dispute that ml is a credible
witness. indeed, counsel for dp acknowledges that it appears ml truly believes
dp got into bed with her and sexually assaulted her.
as credible, honest, straight-forward, consistent,
and persuasive as ml’s evidence was about the core allegation, i do have
concerns about the
reliability of her
evidence on the details of the relevant estimated 2 minutes when the offence
occurred.
ml honestly told police that “in the moment” she
might have wondered if it was a bad dream, and that she doubted herself. that
is why she clarified some details about that evening with friends, and what
happened after she went to sleep. she discussed dp’s whereabouts and admitted
that the assault was “not a normal event” that she discussed with her friends
after.
she told police she was “disoriented” and
“confused” at the time. in court, ml explained that her disorientation and
confusion was about her emotions, not about what happened.
ml was also very sad and experienced pain, which
gave her more confidence to, “realize, yes. that’s what happened to me.”
to be clear, these are all understandable,
reasonable responses to the experience ml testified to having gone through.
however, ml testified that she was “sure” about
what happened when she woke up after she was put to bed, but she
also
testified she said she could
not
say to the police she was “100%”
certain. she
believes
dp put his penis in her anus for 20 seconds or so.
i believe ml when she testified that something
happened to her that night. however, believing a witness is not the same as
accepting a witness’ evidence as reliable to the standard of proof of beyond a
reasonable doubt.
i must also consider dp’s evidence.
dp was candid. he was open about the medications
he was taking at the time. he was detailed about why he thought he took “7-10”
sips. he explained why he thought alcohol did not affect him differently,
regardless of whether he took medication, since he had experimented drinking
with and without taking medication. he was specific as to what enabled him to
say where particular events happened, such as being in a subway station he
associates with the eaton centre, seeing the hospital sign when the group
discussed going to ez’s, and having to decide at 10:00 p.m. whether to go home
to make his 11:30 p.m. curfew. he admitted he was scared he would get lost if
he left alone, that drinking made him silly and do things he would not
otherwise do, such as let the girls put make-up him. he was honest about being
annoyed when he did not know where his pants were, that it nagged at him, and that
he threw up in ez’s room.
on everyone’s evidence, including dp’s, he was on
medication, drunk, and high. this likely clouded his judgement and his memory. dp
too was credible, but his evidence too raises reliability concerns. he may very
well have gotten into bed with ml, and just like other moments in the evening,
does not remember doing so.
having been friends, both ml and dp testified in
a distraught manner about what they recalled occurred that night. both ml and
dp seemed to have no ill will towards each other, even now.
vi.
conclusion
in essence, these were two clearly intoxicated
and high young people. the reliability concerns of ml’s evidence about the
relevant 2 minutes on the night in question, paired with the plausibility of
dp’s evidence that the event did not occur, lead me to the conclusion that the
crown has not met its high burden. the charge has not been proven beyond a
reasonable doubt.
i find dp not guilty of the charge of sexual
assault.
released:  november
3, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria
the parties were advised that it is my fulsome written reasons that govern.
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r. 320
at para.
39
.
r. v. b (bw), no. 758 at
para. 28.
r. v. b.(g.)
1990 canlii 7308 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 30 at para.
48
.
r. v. w.(d.)
,
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
, 1 scr 742
r. v. seaboyer; r. v. gayme
,
1991 canlii 76 (scc)
, 2 scr 577 at para.
679-680
,
r. v. darrach
,
2000 scc 46
at para.
32-37
,
r. v. find
,
2001 scc 32
at para.
103
,
r. v. jl
,
2018 onca 756
at para.
46-47
,
r. v. jc
,
2021 onca 131
at para.
93-98
, and
r. v. jj
,
2022 scc 28
at para.
1
.