ontario court of justice
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
charles hamilton
before
justice a.m elias
heard
on august 11, august 12, and october 21, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 2, 2025
robert de chellis............................................................................... counsel
for the crown
shaleem gill..............................................
counsel for the defendant charles hamilton
elias j.:
overview
a gas-station attendant reported a possibly
impaired driver.  he told police that someone was parked at a gas pump for over
15 minutes, drifting in and out of consciousness. when police arrived, they
detained mr. charles hamilton and asked him to exit his car. he approached them
slowly. police detected an odour of marihuana from his breath. police arrested the
defendant for drug-impaired driving, demanded that he comply with a drug
evaluation, and called for medical assessment given their concerns about his
level of impairment. once he was medically cleared, a drug recognition expert
concluded that he was impaired by cannabis and demanded a sample of his urine.
his urine ultimately tested positive for metabolites of cannabis and
olanzapine. mr. hamilton stands charged that he operated a motor vehicle while
his ability to do so was impaired by drug, contrary to
section 320.14 (1)
(a) of
the
criminal code
.
charter
analysis
mr. hamilton submits that he was the subject of
an unreasonable search and an unlawful arrest contrary to sections 8 and 9 of
the
charter of rights and freedoms
. the crown called two witnesses,
namely pc wickramasinghe, the arresting officer, and pc batte, a drug
recognition expert. i must decide the following issues on the
charter
analysis:
(1)
did constable wickramasinghe have reasonable and
probable grounds to arrest mr. hamilton for drug-impaired driving?
(2)
did mr. hamilton have a reasonable expectation
of privacy when he was being medically assessed in the back of the police cruiser?
(3)
did the dre have reasonable grounds to make a
demand for mr. hamilton to comply with a drug evaluation?
(4)
did the dre conduct her evaluation in an
unreasonable manner?
(5)
if there are one or more breaches of the
charter
,
should the evidence be excluded pursuant to
s.24(2)
?
did constable wickramasinghe have reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest mr. hamilton for drug-impaired driving?
the defence submits that pc wickramasinghe did
not have reasonable and probable grounds to arrest the defendant for impaired
driving, without further investigation. the crown submits that reasonable and
probable grounds had crystalized at the point of arrest and no further
investigation was necessary.
whether reasonable and probable grounds exist is
a fact-based exercise dependent upon all the circumstances of the case. the
totality of the circumstances must be considered.
to establish reasonable and
probable grounds for arrest, a police officer must subjectively believe that a
person has committed or is about to commit an offence, and the police officer
must be able to justify that belief on an objective basis, meaning that a
reasonable person placed in the position of the police must be able to conclude
that there were reasonable and probable grounds. the police need not
demonstrate anything more than reasonable and probable grounds. specifically,
the police need not establish a prima facie case for conviction.
the assessment of reasonable grounds is
conducted through the lens of a reasonable person “standing in the shoes of the
police officer” with that constable’s training and experience.
exculpatory or neutral
information cannot be disregarded, but the obligation to take all factors into
account does not require that the police conduct further investigation to rule
out alternate explanations. all the circumstances must be considered, not
isolated factors shorn of context.
i find that constable wickramasinghe had
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest mr. hamilton for drug-impaired
driving.  i reach this conclusion upon analyzing (a) the information he
received prior to attending at the gas station and (b) the observations he made
while on scene prior to arrest. the information received, when combined with
his direct observations, grounds a reasonable and probable belief that mr.
hamilton was operating a motor vehicle while impaired by drug.
on the morning of march 27, 2024, constable
wickramasinghe learned the following information from central dispatch,
regarding a possible impaired driver, before attending on scene of a gas
station:
(1)
a gas station attendant at petro canada, located
at 7761 woodbine avenue, had called police to report that a male in his
thirties (30s) had been at pump #1 for 15-20 minutes and was in and out of
consciousness: sleeping and waking up. he was driving a black ford with a
numbered plate.
constable wickramasinghe made his way to the gas
station to respond to the impaired call. enroute, he learned the following
information:
(1)
the attendant described the driver as “extremely
groggy and impaired.” he further advised that, “the driver passed out and he
attempted to wake him up a number of times.”
(2)
the attendant reported that the driver attempted
to pump gas but spilled the gas all over the vehicle. he was unable to place
the gas nozzle into the car. no alcohol was visible. the vehicle had been at
the gas station since 7 am that morning.
when he arrived at the gas station, constable
wickramasinghe observed a black ford, bearing a licence plate matching the
earlier description, parked at pump 1, facing southbound.  he immediately
“pinned” the car with a fellow cruiser, so that it wouldn’t drive away. i note,
at this juncture, that mr. gill concedes that police had a reasonable suspicion
to detain mr. hamilton and block in his car. given this concession, i will not
assess the validity of the detention.
at this point, the constable wickramasinghe
directly observed mr. hamilton while he was in the driver’s seat of the car. he
was slumped back, sleeping, with his feet hanging out of the driver’s side
window.  constable wickramasinghe approached the ford and motioned to the
driver to exit his car and walk towards him. the defendant complied. the
officer observed mr. hamilton walk and move slowly.  his eyes were droopy.
when the defendant asked why police were blocking his car, constable wickramasinghe
detected a strong odour of marihuana emanating from mr. hamilton’s mouth.
constable wickramasinghe arrested mr. hamilton for impaired driving by drug.
i find that the crown has proved that the
constable subjectively, and objectively, had grounds to arrest mr. hamilton.
these grounds existed at the time of a dynamic arrest:
(a)
the officer testified that he saw mr. hamilton
slumped back, sleeping in his car, with his legs hanging out of the driver side
window. when mr. hamilton exited his car, he was slow and unsteady on his feet.
the constable immediately detected the odour of marihuana.
(b)
prior to make these observations, the constable
had received information that mr. hamilton was at the pump for 3 hours; was
spilling gas; and was in and out of consciousness. he believed this
information.
the defence submits that the arresting officer
embarked on no further investigation after detecting an odour of marihuana
emanating from mr. hamilton. namely, no field sobriety test, nor asd demand was
issued. it is mr. gill’s submission that mr. hamilton was arrested on a “mere
hunch: no questions were asked of mr. hamilton.
there is no minimum time period nor mandatory
questioning that must occur before an officer can objectively have reasonable
and probable grounds. there is no requirement that a roadside sample be taken.
the asd provides evidence of the blood alcohol concentration in the suspect's
blood, not evidence of impairment. once the officer had subjectively and
objectively reasonable and probable grounds, he was not required to delay the
arrest to conduct more tests.
the issue is not whether the officer could have conducted a more thorough
investigation. the issue is whether, when the officer arrested mr. hamilton, he
subjectively and objectively had reasonable and probable grounds to do so. that
the belief was formed in less than one minute is not determinative. that an
opinion of impairment of his ability to operate a motor vehicle can be made in
under a minute is neither surprising nor unusual.
did mr. hamilton have a reasonable expectation
of privacy during medical assessment in police custody?
after constable wickramasinghe arrested mr.
hamilton, he placed him in the back of his cruiser. mr. hamilton continued to
go in and out of sleep while the constable advised of his reason for arrest,
cautioned him, and demanded that he submit to a drug recognition evaluation.
the officer testified that he was concerned for mr. hamilton’s medical
wellbeing given his ‘high level of impairment.’ acting on that concern,
constable wickramasinghe called for ambulatory assistance. when a firetruck
arrived on scene, an initial medical examination took place while the defendant
remained in the back of the police cruiser. when ambulatory staff removed him
from the police cruiser, pc wickramasinghe stood next to mr. hamilton and held his
arm.
the defence submits that the officer’s
attendance during this medical assessment violated mr. hamilton’s right to be
secure against unreasonable search or seizure under
section 8
of the
charter
.
the crown submits that mr. hamilton did not have a reasonable expectation of
privacy. furthermore, the crown submits that no information from this medical
examination is used for investigative, or prosecutorial purposes.
i find that mr. hamilton did not have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in the information he shared with medical
personnel while in police custody, in the back of a police car, and while
accompanied by a police officer. a search or seizure will not occur within the
meaning of
s. 8
of the
charter
unless investigative state conduct intrudes
upon a
charter
claimant’s reasonable expectation of privacy.
the determination of whether
a reasonable expectation of privacy exists requires a case-specific, contextual
analysis.
the accused’s reasonable expectation of privacy
extends only to certain communications made for the purpose of giving and
receiving medical care. there is no blanket expectation of privacy in respect
of all activities that occur in a hospital emergency room, or all
communications that pass between medical personnel and a patient.
an “information privacy” claim is made where an
individual asserts the right “to determine for themselves when, how, and to
what extent information about them is communicated to others”.
when an informational right
of privacy is being claimed, the appropriate question is whether the
information is the sort that society accepts should remain out of the state’s
hands because of what it reveals about the person involved, the reasons why it
was collected, and the circumstances in which it was intended to be used.”
taking these three factors
into account, i find mr. hamilton did not enjoy a reasonable expectation of
privacy while speaking to medical personnel within the police cruiser.
nature of information
during the medical examination, mr. hamilton
advised personnel that he had consumed marihuana. he also provided his finger
so that his pulse could be taken. while the information about drug usage would
otherwise be self-incriminatory, as it was in the case of ss, there are
meaningful distinctions in this case. first, unlike the young person in ss, mr.
hamilton knew that a police officer was present.  second, unlike the young
person in ss, mr. hamilton was in police custody, handcuffed in the back of a
cruiser.  third, unlike the young person in ss, mr. hamilton was cautioned and
advised of his right to counsel prior to medical examination. mr. hamilton did
not lack the knowledge required to choose whether to exercise the right to
silence that would have operated.
the information that mr. hamilton disclosed,
that he had used marihuana earlier that day, reveals little about him in the
context of this specific arrest and investigation. police had already formed
reasonable and probable grounds to believe that he was drug-impaired while
operating a vehicle based on his conduct in the gas station. police detected an
odour of marihuana emanating from his mouth prior to his arrest. furthermore,
the arresting officer had already made a demand that mr. hamilton submit to a
drug impairment evaluation, where he would be directly asked about his drug
usage. constable wickramasinghe did not relay any of this information to the
drug recognition officer, nor did she rely on it to form her grounds to demand
an evaluation.
reasons information was collected &
circumstances of collection
in this case, police overheard the exchange of
medical information to ensure mr. hamilton’s well-being, not to further
investigate him for an impaired driving offence. pc wickramasinghe testified
that the defendant was, “going in and out of consciousness.” he believed that
“he had a high level of impairment and was “concerned for his medical
wellbeing.” he was so concerned for mr. hamilton’s well-being that he hesitated
to drive to an ambulance bay—as he was instructed—while mr. hamilton remained
without medical attention in the backseat of the police cruiser. he worried
that mr. hamilton might go into medical distress. he testified that he called
ambulance to potentially “save mr. hamilton’s life.”
the in-car camera continued to record the
interaction. when asked why the in-car camera remained on during this
assessment, pc wickramasinghe indicated it was contrary to police policy to
turn it off. indeed, if the camera was stopped and mr. hamilton’s well-being
was compromised or threatened, the absence of evidence would raise other
constitutional flags, perhaps spurring a lost evidence application.
when medical personnel asked mr. hamilton to
step out of the cruiser, constable wickramasinghe passively accompanied him. i
note here, that mr. hamilton was having trouble standing up and was falling
asleep. the officer stood by as he remained in police custody. he testified
that police “don’t have the ability to lose sight of a prisoner, even for
medical treatment.”  this case is distinguishable from ss, where the young
person had no reason to believe that the answers shared with the paramedic for
health purposes were being captured by a police officer as part of a criminal
investigation. on the contrary, the medical transaction was recorded for
safety, and not investigatory purposes. while mr. hamilton may have incriminated
himself during the medical assessment, this information did not inform the
investigation or the prosecution; he was already placed under arrest, and
subject to the drug impairment evaluation.
having regard to the way the information was
acquired by the police, the nature of the information, and the reason why it
was collected, mr. hamilton had no reasonable expectation of privacy. like
lachappelle, the seriousness of the offence under investigation, mr. hamilton’s
lack of a territorial privacy interest in police cruiser, the absence of any
interference with his medical care, and the nature of the information heard by
the officer all support this conclusion.
was the dre constable entitled to rely on
grounds beyond those of arrest to make her demand?
the defence submits that pc wickramasinghe was
not entitled to provide the drug recognition expert with information that he
learned after mr. hamilton’s arrest. the defence did not provide a legal
authority for this proposition.
constable wickramasinghe issued a demand to mr.
hamilton at 11: 24 hours. prior to 12:59 hours that afternoon, pc rachel batte
renewed the demand that he submit to a drug recognition evaluation. at page 2
of exhibit #3, entitled “york regional police drug influence evaluation narrative”,
pc batte sets out the sources of her information, under the heading “sources.”
first, she details what happened prior to mr. hamilton’s arrest: that a gas
station called to report an impaired driver parked at a pump. while the
attendant attempted to rouse the driver, he would not wake up. the driver then
exited the car and attempted to fill gas on the wrong side of his vehicle
causing it to spill on the ground. next, she details the arresting constable’s
observations of mr. hamilton—slumped in the driver’s seat. when he exited, the
arresting constable could smell marihuana from his breath. she then summarizes
what happens after mr. hamilton’s arrest:
“once placed into the patrol car, the
subject had difficulty remaining upright and slumped forward. pc wickramasinghe
contacted paramedics as a precaution. he was cleared medically. the residue of
dried cannabis was found in the vehicle inside a plastic ziploc bag and the
odour of burnt cannabis was detected by pc wickramasinghe. no evidence of
alcohol consumption and there were no grounds for breath test.”
all that
section 320.28(2)
of the
criminal
code
requires is that a valid demand is made by a peace officer with
reasonable grounds to do so and that the demand is made as soon as practicable.
there is nothing in the
criminal code
or in the jurisprudence that
supports the proposition that the crown must prove the 'who, what, where and
when' of the demand."
as applied to the present case, the ontario court of appeal’s interpretation in
r v. guenter
,
2016 onca 572
permits me to find that a demand by the drug
evaluation expert, pc batte, would satisfy the requirements of
s. 320.28(2)
provided she had formed reasonable grounds and made a demand "as soon as
practicable" thereafter.
first, i find that even if she relied only on
the circumstances that proceeded mr. hamilton’s arrest, she would have
reasonable and probable grounds to demand that he comply with a drug
evaluation. second, i find that she was entitled to rely on information that
arose after his arrest in forming her grounds to believe that his ability to
operate a motor vehicle was impaired by drug—which i find reasonable and
probable in these circumstances.
did constable batte carry out the drug
recognition evaluation in an unreasonable manner?
the defence submits that constable batte
conducted her drug evaluation in manner that was unreasonable. mr. gill further
submits that the dre excluded medical reasons for mr. hamilton’s behaviour
because she was advised that he was medically cleared.  he further submits that
constable batte did not consider that mr. hamilton was asleep, in the cells,
prior to her evaluation. together, he submits, this results in an unreasonable
search.
there is no evidence that the evaluation was
conducted in an unreasonable manner.
based on the questions constable batte asked mr.
hamilton at the outset of her examination, she was entitled to exclude fatigue
and medical reasons as justifications for his irregular behaviour. exhibit #3
contains a one-page drug impairment evaluation report using a prescribed form,
and qualitative, 9 page “drug evaluation narrative.” constable batte notes the
location of the examination, the witnesses, her sources of information prior to
the exam, and her first observations of mr. hamilton. under her first
observations, she asks, “when did you sleep and for how long?” and mr. hamilton
answers, “yesterday, at 9 pm, for 5 hours.” she then asks, “are you sick or
injured?” and he responds, “no.”  she then asks whether he was sick or injured,
diabetic, epileptic, whether he had physical disabilities, or was under the
care of a doctor. he responded to all these questions in the negative.
these questions all
correspond to the prescribed fields on the standard, drug impairment
evaluation. in asking these questions, constable batte learned about mr.
hamilton’s quantity of sleep and his medical condition. her assessment was not
skewed by the information she received from pc wickramasinghe nor was it
misguided by her lack of knowledge about his sleeping inside the cells. i find
her search was conducted in a reasonable manner, as prescribed by the drug
impairment evaluation standard intake form.
24(2) analysis
i have found no section 9 or section 8 breaches
under the
charter of rights and freedoms
. dc wickramasinghe did not rely
on any information provided during his medical assessment when forming his
grounds to arrest mr. hamilton, who was already in police custody. nor did the
drug recognition expert rely on any information exchanged during the medical examination
to form her grounds to demand compliance with the evaluation. i note,
parenthetically, that the dre would have learned that mr. hamilton was
“medically cleared” even if pc wickramasinghe did not passively attend the
assessment. the crown did not seek to tender any information captured during
the medical assessment and asked to excise that portion of the in-car camera
from evidence on the trial proper.
in the further alternative, if mr. hamilton
did
enjoy a reasonable expectation of privacy to this information, and police
conduct breached his section 8 rights, and the demand for a drug evaluation and
collection of his urine was contextually related to this breach, this still
would not mandate an exclusion of the urine analysis or dre report under 24(2).
police conduct was not serious and was technical in nature: it was the evidence
of the officer that he summoned ambulatory care to ensure mr. hamilton’s
well-being given his high level of impairment. he did not turn off the in-car
camera because he was responsible for mr. hamilton’s safety while in police
custody. it was contrary to york regional police policy to suspend the
recording of the in-car camera. likewise, the impact of the breach on mr.
hamilton’s constitutionally protected rights is minimal, given that he was
already the subject of dre evaluation where he would reveal his drug
consumption and participate in clinical testing. society’s interest would
favour adjudication on the merits. balancing all these factors, excluding the
dre evaluation and urine analysis would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute. mr. hamilton’s
charter
application is dismissed.
trial proper
the crown bears the onus to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. hamilton operated a conveyance while his ability to
operate was impaired, to any degree, by drug on march 27, 2024. defence
conceded mr. hamilton’s identity, date of the offence, and jurisdiction. the
following issues arise on the trial evidence:
(1)
was mr. hamilton “operating” a motor vehicle?
(2)
was mr. hamilton’s ability to operate a motor
vehicle impaired to any degree?
(3)
if was impaired to any degree, was he impaired
by drug?
was mr. hamilton
operating
a motor
vehicle?
the defence submits that the crown has not
established that mr. hamilton was in “care or control’ of his motor vehicle.
namely, no evidence as to how the key to the car was found on the dash after
mr. hamilton was found asleep in the driver’ seat.
section 320.11
of the
criminal code
defines ‘operate’ for the purposes of offences relating to conveyances. in
respect of a motor vehicle, “operate” means to drive it or have care or control
of it. pursuant to
s. 320.35
of the
criminal code
, the crown may prove operation
via “care or control” by proving that the accused occupied the driver’s seat of
the vehicle:
in proceedings in respect of an offence
under section 320.14 or 320.15, if it is proved that the accused occupied the
seat or position ordinarily occupied by a person who operates a conveyance, the
accused is presumed to have been operating the conveyance unless they establish
that they did not occupy that seat or position for the purpose of setting the
conveyance in motion.
the presumption is engaged when the accused
first occupies the driver’s seat, not when the police arrive later. the
mens
rea
and
actus reus
of the offence are complete at that time. the
purpose of the legislation is to discourage intoxicated persons from even
occupying the driver’s seat.
the presumption may be rebutted by showing on the balance of probabilities that
the accused had no intention of setting the vehicle in motion.
in this case, mr. hamilton’s position in the
driver’s seat engages the presumption.
there is no evidence that rebuts the presumption on a balance of probabilities.
on the contrary, mr. hamilton was found passed out seated behind the driver’s
wheel, slumped backward with his feet hanging out of the driver-side window on
the premises of a public, commercial business, namely a gas station. he did not
have permission to remain there indefinitely. i conclude that the crown has established
occupancy and thereby proven that mr. hamilton operated the vehicle.
was mr. hamilton’s ability to operate a motor
vehicle impaired?
the crown bears the onus of proving
impairment—to any degree, including
slight
impairment—beyond a
reasonable doubt, on all the evidence. the impairment of one’s ability to drive
is generally understood as meaning the alteration of one’s judgment and the
decrease in one’s physical abilities. if the evidence establishes any degree of
impairment ranging from slight to great, the offence has been made out. slight
impairment to drive relates to a reduced ability in some measure to perform a
complex motor function whether the impairment impacts on perception or field of
vision reaction or response time, judgment, and regard for the rules of the
road.
in considering the observations of the arresting
officer, the conduct of mr. hamilton on the in-car camera, in conjunction with
the clinical observations of the drug recognition expert, i find that mr.
hamilton’s impairment is the only reasonable conclusion available on this
constellation of facts:
pre-arrest evidence
: constable wickramasinghe testified that he observed mr. hamilton
passed out, with his feet hanging out of the driver side window, while his car
was parked in a busy gas station at 11 am in the morning on a weekday. when mr.
hamilton exited the vehicle, he observed that mr. hamilton was moving and
speaking slowly.
in-car camera evidence
: the in-car camera video, entered as exhibit 2 on the trial,
demonstrates mr. hamilton’s impairment based on the following observations:
(a)
mr. hamilton is placed in the back of a police
cruiser. after mr. hamilton is told the reason for his arrest and cautioned
between 11:20 and 11:24 am, he lies down and proceeds to sleep in the police
car. the arresting constable then reads the demand that he submit to drug
evaluation. mr. hamilton remains in a lethargic condition—where he interacts
briefly then proceeds to shut his eyes—in the back of the police car.
throughout his time in the police cruiser prior to ems attending, the defendant
appears to drift in and out of sleep.
(b)
a firetruck arrives at the side of the cruiser
to assess mr. hamilton between 11:42 and 11:47 am. mr. hamilton is placed back
into the police cruiser at 11:47 am. he proceeds to lie back down against the
chair and, once again, falls asleep. as the cruiser moves towards the police
station, i note that mr. hamilton remains asleep in the car, with his eyes
closed until the cruiser reaches the police station, at 12:04 pm.
these observations cannot be divorced from their
context. mr. hamilton is slumped against the seat of the police car, fading in
and out of sleep, while he is under arrest for a criminal charge. he remains
lethargic and in a generalized state of grogginess while he is advised of his
right to counsel, his obligation to submit to a drug evaluation demand, and
transported to a police station. this level of lethargy prompted pc wickramasinghe
to seek out medical attention. this level of lethargy impairs one’s ability to
drive with due attention, concentration and co-ordination.
observations made by drug recognition expert
: while mr. hamilton’s conduct on the in-car camera, discussed
above, demonstrates his impairment, this conclusion is corroborated by the drug
recognition evaluation. i consider the dre’s opinion, that, “the subject’s
ability to operate a conveyance is impaired by cannabis” as one fact that forms
the constellation of evidence before the court. constable batte observed that
mr. hamilton’s eyes appeared watery and droopy. she described his attitude as
groggy and his co-ordination, movement and speech as slow.
mr. hamilton’s pre-arrest and post-arrest
behaviour demonstrate his impairment beyond a reasonable doubt. the in-car
camera footage is capable of establishing this impairment and is further
supplemented by constable batte’s observations during the drug evaluation. i
find that a person who is falling asleep, slumped over, and unable to keep his
eyes open while under arrest and caution, could not drive with due concentration
and co-ordination. the evidence is overwhelming that mr. hamilton’s ability to
drive was impaired.
was mr. hamilton impaired by drug?
constable batte identified cannabis as impairing
mr. hamilton’s ability to drive. she demanded that he provide a sample of his
urine. the toxicology report, filed as exhibit 5 on the trial, identified
“carboxytetrahydrocannabinol” in his urine. this is described at paragraph 2 of
that report as a metabolite of thc and its detection in urine indicates prior
use of, exposure to, cannabis products:
“thc can impair the individual’s ability to
operate a motor vehicle. the effects of thc can include altered time
perception, incoordination, and decreased ability to concentrate. thc is
unlikely to be detected in urine; therefore, no inference regarding the recency
of cannabis use can be made based on the absence of thc in urine.”
the toxicology report further detected
olanzapine in mr. hamilton’s urine. paragraph 3 of that report indicates that
“olanzapine can impair an individual’s ability to operate a motor vehicle. the
effects of olanzapine can include dizziness and drowsiness.”
section 320.31(6)
of the
criminal code
allows two presumptions when three pre-conditions are met:
(a)
a presumption that the drug was present in the body
at the time of operation and;
(b)
a presumption that the drug caused the
impairment
the preconditions for the presumption that
cannabis was present in mr. hamilton’s body at the time he operated the
vehicle, and that cannabis caused the impairment are met in this case, namely: the
analysis of the urine sample demonstrates that mr. hamilton had a drug—a
cannabis metabolite and olanzapine—in his body; cannabis was identified by the
evaluating constable, pc batte.
mr. hamilton’s ability to operate a motor vehicle
was proved to be impaired by drug beyond a reasonable doubt.
conclusion
the crown has established, beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. hamilton was operating a motor-vehicle and his ability to do so
was impaired by drug on march 27, 2024. i find him guilty of this charge.
released:  december 2, 2025
signed:
justice ann marina elias
r v bush
,
2010 onca 554
at para
54
r v wu
,
2015 onca 667
at para
49
, r v storrey,
1990 canlii 125 (scc)
,
scj no 12.
r v wu
,
2015 onca 667
at para
50
r v leppanen
,
2015 onsc 2973
at para
38
r v bush
,
2010 onca 554
at para
54
r v bush
,
2010 onca 554
at para
70
r. v. s.s
.,
2023 onca 130
, at para
29
r. v. s.s
.,
2023 onca 130
at para
36
r. v. singh
,
2024 onca 66
at para
55
r. v. s.s
.,
2023 onca 130
, at para
40
r. v. jones
,
2025 onsc 6158
at para
67
citing
r. v. gomboc
,
2010
scc 55
at para.
34
r v guenter
,
2016 onca 572
at para
89
exhibit 3, drug influence evaluation narrative, page 2.
r. v. szymanski
,
2009 canlii 45328 (on sc)
, o.j. no. 3623 (s.c.j.) at paras.
35-42
.
r. v. o’neill
,
2016 onca 307
r. v. green
,
2007 abpc 286
r. v. grant
,
2014 onsc 1479