ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dhaliwal
, 2025 oncj 731
date:  august
26, 2025
court
file no.:  brampton 3111 998 23 31110949
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
harshan dhaliwal
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 25-26 august 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 26 august 2025
a. de avila................................................................................. counsel
for the prosecution
t. hicks........................................................ counsel
for the defendant harshan dhaliwal
ruling on
charter
application under
ss. 8, 9, and 24(2)
renwick j.:
introduction
the defendant is charged with the single count of
having operated his conveyance with an impermissible blood alcohol
concentration, contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
. he was
observed by police driving his car inside a construction zone around 3:00 a.m.
when police spoke with the defendant, an odour of alcohol was detected, a
roadside breath demand was made, a “fail” result was registered, and the
defendant provided samples of his breath that led to the charge before the
court.
this was a very brief and focused trial. only the arresting officer, who
was also the qualified technician, and the defendant testified on the
charter
application (which ran concurrent to the trial evidence).
the parties conceded that the result on the application was
determinative of the result on the trial: if the court finds a s. 8 or s. 9
charter
violation, the evidential breath sampling results would be inadmissible and an
acquittal would result, whereas the admissibility of the breath readings would
lead to a conviction.
these reasons will explain my decision to dismiss the
charter
application and admit the breath testing results.
governing legal principles
though the defendant generally has the onus to
establish violations of the
charter
on a balance of probabilities,
where there is a warrantless
search, as in this case, the prosecutor must establish that the search was
conducted reasonably and pursuant to some lawful authority.
thus, both parties have an onus of proof on a
balance of probabilities: here, the defendant must prosecute his
charter
claim that the police did not have a reasonable grounds to suspect the presence
of alcohol in his body to require a roadside breath screening, while the prosecutor
has to establish that the seizure of the evidential breath samples followed a
lawful breath demand compliant with the statutory regime for warrantless breath
testing.
generally, reasonable grounds relate to
credibly-based probability.
however, at the stage of demanding a roadside breath screening, all that is
required is credibly-based possibility: is it reasonably possible that the
driver has alcohol in her body.
subsection 320.27(1)
of the
criminal code
makes this plain:
testing for
presence of alcohol or drug
if a peace
officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has alcohol or a drug
in their body and that the person has, within the preceding three hours,
operated a conveyance, the peace officer may, by demand, require the person to
comply with the requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (b) in the
case of alcohol or with the requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a)
and (c) in the case of a drug:
(a)
to immediately perform the physical coordination tests
prescribed by regulation and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose;
(b)
to immediately provide the samples of breath that, in the
peace officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made
by means of an approved screening device and to accompany the peace officer for
that purpose;
…
reasonable grounds to suspect is a lower standard than reasonable
and probable grounds to believe because it engages a reasonable possibility,
rather than a probability of a state of affairs.
given the social value placed on detecting and preventing drunk
driving, in the context of roadside breath screening, the reasonable suspicion
need not even relate to the possibility of a criminal offence, but simply a
reasonable possibility that a motorist has alcohol in her body during or within
three hours of driving.
because the standard deals with possibilities, there will be
cases where the police will erroneously suspect drivers who have no alcohol in
their body, but nonetheless require them to perform a roadside breath screening.
however, the suspicion held by the police cannot be so broad that
it descends to the level of generalized or bald suspicion – suspicion that
attaches to a particular location or activity, instead of a specific
person:
r. v. chehil
,
2013 scc 49
, at paras.
26-30
.
properly articulated, the reasonable suspicion standard prevents
the indiscriminate and discriminatory exercise of police power.
again, context is critical; the statute permits
this base level of opinion (reasonable suspicion) only at the start of investigations
related to a highly regulated, dangerous public activity – driving.
in summary, reasonable grounds to suspect must
be articulable, subjectively held by the officer, and objectively reasonable.
an officer is entitled to rely on experience and common sense in formulating
the target possibility. also, the police can be mistaken in the suspicion
formed, as long as the suspicion was objectively reasonable given competing
inferences or alternative explanations for the information considered.
the
evidence and findings of fact
i have viewed the initial (video only)
interaction with the defendant captured on the officer’s dash camera several
times. within 10 seconds of her approach to speak to the defendant, the officer
stepped back, which apparently aligned with her request to have him follow her
for the breath screening procedure.
constable everilda ratnakumar testified that she
first observed the defendant in a clearly marked construction area as she was
stopped waiting to turn and enter the on-ramp to the highway. given the early
hour (just after 3:00 a.m.), she decided to investigate. to her it was obvious
that this was a passenger vehicle, not a construction vehicle, in a
construction area, late at night, and there was the possibility of criminal
activity (theft of construction equipment, for instance).
once cst. ratnakumar approached and spoke with
the driver (the defendant), she claimed to have detected the odour of alcohol
coming from his breath. she asked about his presence in that area and he
indicated he was following his gps. she testified that she asked him about alcohol
consumption and also where he was coming from before seeking his driver’s
license and making her demand for a roadside breath screening.
the defendant’s testimony differed. he says that
initially, they spoke very little, asking only about his presence in the area
before the officer told him to come with her. he testified that once he was outside
his car there were questions asked about alcohol consumption and his departure
point that night. the defendant also testified that the officer did not take
his driver’s license when he first handed it to her.
interestingly, the dash-cam video contradicted
both witnesses about the timing of the officer’s reception of the defendant’s
driver’s license. i find that the defendant offered it through the open
driver’s window at the start of their interaction, and the officer took it. as
she walked back to the police car, the driver’s license is visible in the
officer’s right hand at several points and from different angles.
i reject the defendant’s testimony that the
breath screening demand was made after only one question was asked. though it
was a brief interaction (10 seconds), i accept as accurate the evidence that
the officer asked the defendant about alcohol consumption and his driving origins
before making a roadside breath screening demand. i reject his testimony on
this point for the following reasons:
i.
i accept as accurate the officer’s evidence
respecting the initial conversation;
ii.
the defendant lied to the police when asked
about his alcohol consumption;
iii.
the defendant provided no other details for anything
else that occurred during the 10 second interaction after his brief answer (he
was “following his gps”);
iv.
it is implausible that the officer waited until
the defendant was already complying with her demand to ask about alcohol
consumption; and
v.
during the defendant’s four-minute
cross-examination, and despite the several times he was asked, he refused to
admit the obvious - that it was possible that the officer could smell alcohol
on his breath because he had been drinking alcohol that night.
though i have concerns that cst. ratnakumar was
easily perturbed by the defendant’s questions and she was mistaken about the
defendant’s interruptions as the cause to repeat the rights to counsel, i have
no concerns that she was mistaken or otherwise inaccurate concerning their
initial interaction.
more importantly, i accept the officer’s
testimony that she perceived the smell of alcohol coming from the defendant’s
breath when she first dealt with him at his car window. the defendant’s
testimony, the cross-examination of the officer, and the submissions did not
erase this possibility and i find that cst. ratnakumar was credible and
sufficiently reliable to accept her evidence on this point.
analysis
reasonable suspicion must be assessed against
the totality of circumstances in a given situation. exculpatory,
neutral, or equivocal information cannot be disregarded when assessing a
constellation of factors.
reasonable suspicion need not be the only
inference that can be drawn from a particular constellation of factors:
much as the seven stars that
form the big dipper have also been interpreted as a bear, a saucepan, and a
plough, factors that give rise to a reasonable suspicion may also support
completely innocent explanations.  this is acceptable, as the reasonable
suspicion standard addresses the
possibility
of uncovering
criminality, and not a
probability
of doing so.
the formation of reasonable suspicion is not necessarily
negated by other possible explanations, unless the police unreasonably discount
information that calls into question that which gives rise to the target
possibility.
here, the defendant denied having consumed
alcohol. arguably, that called into question the officer’s perception that he
had alcohol emanating from his breath. i find that the officer was entitled to
disregard this information because it was likely tainted because it came from
the person under suspicion and it was contradicted by the evidence confronting
her (an olfactory sensation, the location of the defendant’s car, and a poor
explanation for the defendant’s driving conduct – the gps did not tell the
defendant to drive many metres past the construction pylons, off-road, near
mounds of dirt and construction equipment).
i also accept that there is at least one other explanation
for the officer’s perception of the smell of alcohol besides emanation from the
defendant; it could have come from his passenger. but this does not negate the
possibility that it could have come from the defendant.
moreover, even if cst. ratnakumar is mistaken in
her perception that the smell of alcohol came from the defendant, i am
satisfied that her subjective suspicion (alcohol in the defendant’s body) was
objectively reasonable for the following reasons:
i.
the defendant’s car was located many metres into
an area restricted by large pylons, off the pavement, near construction
equipment, and beyond the clearly visible on-ramp to the highway;
ii.
it was late at night, after licensed
establishments serving alcohol would be closed;
iii.
suspiciously, perhaps to pre-empt much
discussion, the defendant did not wait to see why the officer was stopping him
before holding his driver’s license out the window; and
iv.
it is undisputed that there was a smell of
alcohol coming from inside the defendant’s car.
when i consider all of the available evidence, i
am satisfied that it was reasonable for cst. ratnakumar to suspect the
possibility that the defendant had alcohol in his body while driving given the
circumstances of his location, his behaviour, the time of day, and the smell of
alcohol. this is the minimum threshold of opinion that she needed to possess to
make a lawful demand under
s. 320.27(1)
.
accordingly, the applicant has failed to satisfy
me on a balance of probabilities that the stopping of the defendant’s vehicle
was arbitrary or that the demand for a roadside breath screening was unconstitutional.
conclusion
given my findings of fact, it is not established
on a civil standard that the defendant’s
charter
rights were violated.
the application is dismissed.
released:  26 august 2025
justice
g. paul renwick
r
. v.
collins
,
1987 canlii 84 (scc)
, s.c.j. no. 15 at para.
21
.
collins
, supra
, at para.
23
.
canada (combines investigation acts, director of
investigation and research)
v.
southam
inc.
,
1984 canlii 33 (scc)
,
s.c.j. no. 36
.
chehil
,
supra
, at para.
3
.
chehil
, supra
, at para.
32
.