ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. thomas-henry
, 2025 oncj 511
date:
october 2, 2025
court
file no.:  24-2100131000
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
landon thomas-henry
before
justice robert s. gee
heard
on april 2 and 28, 2025, july 15, 2025, august 27, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 2, 2025
anthony minelli................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
jaime stephenson and cristina valeri...................................
counsel for the accused
gee j.:
introduction
on may 6, 2024, someone exited a house on the
six nations reserve and started firing a gun at a van fleeing down the
driveway. the crown alleges the person doing the shooting was the accused,
landon thomas-henry.
as a result of this incident, mr. thomas-henry
is facing 27 charges being; five counts of attempted murder, five counts of
pointing a firearm, one count of careless use of a firearm, one count of
possessing a firearm without a licence, one count of knowingly possessing a
firearm while unlicenced, two counts of assault, one count of uttering a
threat, one count of dangerous operation, two counts of breaching a probation
order, one for not keeping the peace, the other for possessing a weapon, five
counts of discharging a firearm with the intent to endanger life, one count of
possessing a weapon for a dangerous purpose, one count of possessing a firearm
while subject to a prohibition order and last, one count of driving while
prohibited.
the crown proceeded by indictment and mr. thomas-henry
elected to have his trial in the ontario court of justice. the defence has
admitted that at the time of this incident, mr. thomas-henry was subject to a
probation order with terms he keep the peace and not possess weapons, that he
was subject to a weapons prohibition order, that he was prohibited from driving
and that he did not have a licence to possess firearms. following the
conclusion of the evidence, the crown has conceded there is not sufficient
evidence to prove the charges of attempt murder and has invited me to dismiss
those counts.
the balance of these reasons will explain why i find
the crown has proven most, but not all of the remaining 22 counts against mr.
thomas-henry.
issues and analysis
the allegations in this matter, at their core,
are fairly straightforward. jaycee greene was driving a rented dodge minivan
with her four kids and two cousins, rikki and ashley general. it was after
midnight on may 6, 2024, when they went to pick up ms. greene’s brother wesley
longboat to give him a ride to his father’s place. when they picked him up, mr.
thomas-henry asked to be taken to mcdonald's where he said he would buy
everyone food. after mcdonald's, they dropped off wesley at his father’s, but mr.
thomas-henry refused to leave the van. he said he wanted a ride to the bank, so
ms. greene took him there too. after the bank, they proceeded to take him back
to his house. along the way, mr. thomas-henry started becoming inappropriate toward
the adult women and started showing them sexually explicit videos of himself on
his phone. they told him to stop and that it was inappropriate. when they
arrived at mr. thomas-henry’s house, words were exchanged, and a physical
altercation took place between the women and mr. thomas-henry. during this
altercation, he is alleged to have made threatening comments including asking rikki
general if she wished to be shot. upon him saying this, ms. greene fled down
the driveway in the van while ashley and rikki, who were outside of the van ran
down the driveway. as they got to the road, ashley and rikki were getting in
the van when they heard 4 or 5 of what they describe as gunshots being fired
toward them and the van. one shot shattered the rear window of the van, hit the
seatbelt assembly at the top of one of the back seats and hit the inside pillar
of the van damaging it. none of the women or the children were hit. they fled
from the scene and went to ms. greene’s aunt’s house where they called the
police.
the police began an investigation and about two
hours after the initial report, observed a vehicle they believed associated to
mr. thomas-henry. it fled from the police at a high rate of speed and contact
was initially lost. it was spotted again a short time later and followed by
police. it took a bend in the road near the gaylord powless arena too fast and
too wide, and the vehicle went in the ditch and rolled onto its driver’s side.
mr. thomas-henry was then arrested by police as he was exiting through the
upturned, passenger side window.
there are several distinct issues that need to
be decided to determine if the crown has proven the charges beyond a reasonable
doubt. the first is the credibility and reliability of the crown’s three main
witnesses, rikki general, ashley general, and jaycee greene. the credibility
and reliability of the evidence of these witnesses is critical since they are
the only three who testified to the most serious, firearm related incident that
night that has led to the bulk of the charges against mr. thomas-henry. the
accused did not testify, nor did he call any other evidence.
whether the evidence of these three witnesses
can be accepted, either in whole or part is necessary to determine first, as it
will inform whether the next issue to be decided, whether identity of the
shooter has been proven.
the defence position is that the reliability of
the evidence of ashley and rikki general is compromised by their alcohol
consumption. the credibility of all three witnesses is suspect because there
are simply too many inconsistencies between their evidence for the court to get
a clear enough picture of what happened that night to make any findings beyond
a reasonable doubt and, these witnesses have discussed the events of the night
since, which has compromised the reliability of their individual accounts.
i listened carefully to the testimony of these
three witnesses, reviewed the transcripts of their evidence and have considered
the submissions of counsel. in the end i disagree with the defence
characterization of their evidence as incredible or unreliable. i found all
three witnesses testified in a straightforward, measured manner. their answers were
responsive to questions asked by counsel, they did not hesitate when answering
and admitted to gaps in their memories where applicable. they also acknowledged
the parts of their understanding of the events they may have learned from others.
in the end, i was left with the impression they were each doing their best to
give an honest and truthful account of what happened.
the inconsistencies highlighted by the defence i
find were all on minor or inconsequential aspects of the narratives told by the
witnesses. for instance, ashley testified she had asked ms. greene for a ride
earlier in the night to her aunt’s house, whereas rikki testified ms. greene
asked them if they wanted to go for a ride to pick up her brother wesley. another
was whether when they picked up wesley was mr. thomas-henry picked up at the
same time or after. a further was when at the bank whether mr. thomas-henry got
out of the van or whether they used the drive through. after the events, there
was also an inconsistency between them as to who called the police. ashley and
rikki testified ms. greene phoned the police while ms. greene testified it was
ashley who called.
i find these inconsistencies are all on minor
points and do not affect the overall credibility or reliability of the witnesses’
accounts. inconsistencies on minor points such as these are not uncommon when
three people testify to a shared event that occurred to them almost a year
earlier.
on the other hand, on all the most salient
aspects of the events of the night, their testimony is very consistent. they
all testified mr. thomas-henry did not leave the van after dropping off wesley.
they all testified they drove him to the bank. they all testified he then
became inappropriate, showing
sexually explicit videos and making unwanted advances toward the women. when
they arrived at his house, they all agreed mr. thomas-henry continued to be
belligerent, became involved in a physical altercation and made threatening
comments to them. after making the threats, he ran into the house and the three
women fled as they interpreted his threats as a threat to shoot them. as well,
all three testified to hearing what they thought were multiple gunshots being
fired at them.
this is also why i feel the alcohol admittedly
consumed by ashley and rikki, did not impact the reliability of their evidence.
not only did they testify that it did not, as can be seen from the above, they
both were able to recall and relay the most impactful events of that night in a
detailed manner. nor do i find the fact that they may have discussed these incidents
between them before speaking to the police and since the events occurred, has
lessened the quality of their evidence. i did not detect any hint their
evidence may have been tainted by this, either intentionally or
unintentionally. that people who have experienced a shared event like this
would then talk about it is natural and to be expected. it would have been odder,
i would think, if they had testified that after the events, they never spoke
about it with each other.
in the end, i find that all three of these
witnesses, ashley general, rikki general and, jaycee greene, were being honest
and truthful when giving their testimony and i am satisfied the events of that
night unfolded as they have testified, they did.
just because i believe these witnesses, does not
necessarily mean the crown has proven mr. thomas-henry was the shooter. none of
ashley general, rikki general or jaycee greene, saw the shooter. the crown is
arguing that the only reasonable inference to draw is that when all the
circumstances are considered, i can be satisfied it was him.
when the proof of one or more of the elements of
an offence rely on circumstantial evidence, justice cromwell in r. v.
villaroman.
2016 scc 33
, stated at paragraph
30
, that an inference of guilt
should be the only reasonable inference permitted by the evidence.
justice michal fairburn, while she sat as a
superior court judge in the
case of r. v. gill,
2017 onsc 3558
, summarized the approach dictated by the
supreme court in villaroman as follows:
i agree that this case
is an almost purely circumstantial one, particularly as it relates to the
issues of contention. in r. v. villaroman.
2016 scc 33
, cromwell j.
reviewed the correct approach to circumstantial evidence and the inference
drawing process. where one or more element of an offence relies largely or
exclusively on circumstantial evidence, “an inference of guilt drawn from
circumstantial evidence should be the only reasonable inference that such
evidence permits”: villaroman,
at para.
30
. staying
focussed on the question of whether circumstantial evidence admits of other
reasonable alternative inferences, ensures that the trier of fact does not
“fill in the blanks” or “jump to conclusions” too quickly: villaroman
,
paras.
29-30
.
while previous cases speak in terms of other “rational” inferences,
the unanimous villaroman court settled upon the term
“reasonable”: see, r. v
.
griffin,
2009 scc 28
, at para.
33
, villaroman,
at paras. 32-34. as cromwell j. noted
in villaroman
,
while “reasonable” and “rational” inferences
carry the same meaning, and it is not in error to speak in terms of “rational
inferences”, the use of the term “reasonable” guards against any confusion that
may arise from the use of “reasonable doubt” and “rational inference”.
inferences consistent with innocence do not have to arise from
proven facts: villaroman
,
at para.
35
. as fish j.
observed in r. v. khela,
2009 scc 4
, at para.
58
, the defence does
not have to “‘prove’ certain facts in order for the jury to draw an inference
of innocence from them”. to make this a requirement for finding
alternative rational inferences would be to reverse the burden of proof.
ultimately, the court must consider the “range of reasonable inferences that
can be drawn” from the circumstantial evidence. as in villaroman,
at
para.
35
, “[i]f there are reasonable inferences other than guilt, the crown’s
evidence does not meet the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.”
a theory alternative to guilt is not “speculative” simply because
there is no affirmative evidence supporting the theory. a “theory alternative
to guilt” can arise from a lack of evidence: villaroman,
at
para.
36
. gaps in the evidence can result in inferences other than guilt, but
they must be “reasonable given the evidence and the absence of evidence,
assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common sense”: villaroman
,
at
paras.
36-38
.
reasonable possibilities and theories inconsistent with guilt must
be considered, but this does not require the crown to “negative every possible
conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent
with the innocence of the accused”: villaroman
,
at para.
37
, adopting r.
v. bagshaw
,
1971 canlii 13 (scc)
,  s.c.r. 2, at p. 8. other reasonable inferences must find
support in logic and experience and not rest on speculation. as noted by
cromwell j., at para. 38, the “basic question” is whether the circumstantial
evidence, “viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably
capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is
guilty”.
in this case, the crown asserts that when all
the evidence is viewed in its entirety, the only reasonable inference is that
mr. thomas-henry was the shooter. there are several factors the crown points to
which they argue are supportive of this inference. first it was mr.
thomas-henry’s residence. joan henhawk was the landlord of the property mr.
thomas-henry was renting. she testified the residence leased by mr.
thomas-henry was a one-bedroom unit and her rental agreement was with him
alone, though he often had others with him at the property. second, when mr.
thomas-henry was being dropped off, he got into a physical confrontation with
the three women in the van. third, he made threats to the three women,
including asking rikki general if she wanted to get shot. fourth, he ran into
the house as the women fled and it was within seconds to under a minute that
the shots were fired. fifth, when the residence was searched, police located
five .243 calibre and one 8mm round of ammunition.
the defence argues there is also evidence
pointing away from mr. thomas-henry being the shooter in addition to no one
seeing him doing it. there were two vehicles outside the residence at the time,
there were clothes and shoes found by police in the house which they could not
say didn’t belong to someone else and no gun or firearm was ever located. based
on these factors, the defence alleges the shooter could have been some other
unknown person and not mr. thomas-henry.
in assessing this evidence as a whole, both the
factors referenced by the crown supportive of mr. thomas-henry being the
shooter and the factors mentioned by the defence they say points away from such
a finding, i am satisfied that the only reasonable inference available here is
that mr. thomas-henry was the person who was firing at the women and the van as
it fled his residence. when keeping in mind justice cromwell’s basic question
from above, logic and human experience leads me to conclude that the unknown
person other than mr. thomas-henry theory as advanced by the defence is not a
reasonable inference on the facts of this case.
it is not logical or reasonable to think that in
under a minute of mr. thomas-henry coming into the house, some unrelated person
would exit the house and open fire on the fleeing women and the van when they
were not involved in the altercation in any way. as well, that the police never
located a firearm is not determinative. the shots were fired at about 1:58 am. the
vehicle mr. thomas-henry was later found in was observed leaving the residence
by police at 3:52 am. that’s an almost two-hour period for the weapon to be
hidden or disposed of. also having two vehicles in the driveway, does not
necessarily mean there were others in the residence. it is not uncommon for
individuals to own or possess more than one car.
when the evidence is viewed as a whole, the only
reasonable inference is that mr. thomas-henry was the shooter. he had, just
before, been involved in the altercation in the driveway. i'm satisfied he made
the threat to shoot rikki general, jaycee greene says he uttered. he rushed into
his house and in under a minute someone exits the house and starts firing at
the same people mr. thomas-henry was just fighting and threatening to shoot. further,
when the house is later searched firearm ammunition is found. in all these
circumstances, i am satisfied the person who exited the house and fired the
shots at the van was mr. thomas-henry.
this finding, that mr. thomas-henry was the
shooter is not determinative of guilt for the charges that require proof the
weapon used was a firearm. depending on the charge, the crown must prove the item
met the definition of a firearm found in
s. 2
of the
criminal code
or,
s. 84(3)
(d)
of the criminal code.
in s. 2 of the
criminal code
the definition of
firearm is “…a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet or other projectile
can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death
to a person and includes any frame or receiver of such a barrelled weapon and
anything that can be adapted for use as a firearm.”
in this matter the crown must prove mr.
thomas-henry used a firearm that met this definition in relation to the counts
of pointing a firearm, careless use of a firearm, discharging a firearm with
intent to endanger life, weapons dangerous since it was particularized as a
firearm and, possessing a firearm while prohibited.
the s. 91(1) offence of possessing a firearm
without a licence, and the s. 92(1) offence of knowingly possessing a firearm while
unlicenced, require the crown to prove the item met the definition of a firearm
found in
s. 84(3)
(d) of the
criminal code
. this section requires the crown to
prove the firearm was designed to fire a projectile with a muzzle velocity
exceeding 152.4 m/s or at a muzzle energy exceeding 5.7 joules.
based on the totality of the evidence in this
matter i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt the firearm used by mr.
thomas-henry met the definition of a firearm in
s. 2
of the
criminal code
but,
i am not satisfied it met the definition of a
s. 84(3)
(d) firearm.
notwithstanding no gun was recovered, it is
still possible for the crown to prove the gun used met the definition of a
firearm found in
s. 2
of
criminal code
. the crown points to several cases where
no gun was recovered but the courts found the totality of the evidence in the
case could lead to a finding the gun used was a firearm. these cases were: r.
v. charbonneau,
2004 canlii 9527 (on ca)
, o.j. 1503, r. v. richards,
2001 canlii 21219 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 2286 and, r.
v. dillon,
2018 onca 1085
.
in assessing the totality of the evidence on
this issue in this matter i am satisfied the gun used by mr. thomas-henry was a
firearm for these reasons. first, were the words he used testified to by ms.
greene. while apparently looking at rikki general, he called her a vulgar name
and asked her if she wanted to get shot. second, although no firearm was found,
when searched police located firearm ammunition in his house. third, the
witnesses all described a sound they heard as a gunshot based mostly on how loud
the sound was. the fourth and most compelling evidence though is the damage
caused to van. it penetrated through the back window, struck the seat belt
assembly of one of the seats, damaged the inside pillar to the van and
shattered the side window on the van as well. additionally, the shot came from
a considerable distance. although there was no evidence as to any precise
measurements being done from mr. thomas-henry’s house to where the van was when
struck, there is some. ms. henhawk testified she thought the laneway in total
was about 400 metres long with mr. thomas-henry’s house about halfway down.
this would mean the distance from where the shot came to where the van was,
would be about 200 metres. i am not making any finding that this is the precise
distance the shot travelled as witnesses can be notoriously inaccurate when
estimating distances, i only make this observation to demonstrate this was not
a shot taken at close range. this was a mid-range to long-range shot that
travelled a considerable distance before striking the van and causing it
significant damage.
in all these circumstances, i have no hesitation
in finding that if the projectile had struck one of the persons inside the van
or outside close to the van, it would have lead to their death or serious
bodily harm. as such, for these reasons i find the gun used by mr. thomas-henry
meets the
s. 2
definition of a firearm.
the counts that require proof the gun meets the
s. 84(3)(d) definition though are different. there was no evidence presented
what the muzzle velocity was or would need to be to cause the damage done to
the van in this case. i think it is likely the gun used was capable of discharging
a projectile in excess of 152.4 m/s given the distance it travelled and damage
caused, but i am unable to make a finding in that regard to the degree required
in a criminal matter.
these findings are now dispositive of some, but
again not all the firearm related offences.
counts 6 to 10 are charges of pointing a firearm
at ashley general, rikki general, and jaycee greene as well as at two of the
children in the van. given the evidence presented i am satisfied the crown has
proven these charges. mr. thomas-henry had just been in the van with all these
people so knew they were still there. he shot the firearm upwards of 4 to 5
times and hit the van directly once. in these circumstances, given he knew these
persons were in the van and the fact he fired at the van, when firing as he was,
he necessarily was pointing the firearm at the persons alleged, therefore he is
guilty of these offences.
count 11 is careless use of a firearm. pointing the
firearm and shooting as he was at the van is a careless use of a firearm alone.
however, this was the shooting of a firearm, after dark, toward a road, without
any consideration of who or what else may be in the line of fire. this as well
demonstrated the careless nature of the use being made by mr. thomas-henry that
night and as such a finding of guilt on this charge is made out as well.
count 24 is a charge that mr. thomas-henry
possessed a weapon, to wit a firearm for a dangerous purpose. this charge is
also made out on the facts of this case. the crown must prove mr. thomas-henry
intended to use the firearm for a dangerous purpose when he possessed it, prior
to his actual use of it. when he ran into his house and retrieved the firearm, his
intention while he possessed it for the period prior to using it, was for a
dangerous purpose, that being to fire it a van he knew was full of people. therefore,
a finding of guilt is appropriate on this count too.
based on the admissions made that mr.
thomas-henry was on a firearms prohibition order at the time and a probation
order with terms to not possess weapons and to keep the peace, findings of
guilt on these three charges are also made out.
counts 12 and 13 are the two counts of possessing
a firearm without a licence and knowingly possessing a firearm while unlicenced,
are the two counts that required the crown to prove the firearm used met the
s.
84(3)
(d) definition. as the crown has not proven the firearm used met that
definition, these two counts have not been proven and not guilty findings will
be made.
this just leaves counts 19 to 23 which are the
counts of discharging a firearm with the intent to endanger the life of ashley
general, rikki general, jaycee greene and two of the children in the van. on
these counts the crown must prove when he fired the gun, mr. thomas-henry did
so with the intent to endanger the lives of the persons named.
in criminal law a person is presumed to intend
the natural consequences of their actions. again, mr. thomas-henry knew all
these named persons were in or associated with the van. he had, just before
retrieving his gun, threatened to shoot rikki general. he then retrieved his
firearm and fired multiple rounds at the van and the women as they fled. the
firearm he was using when doing this could cause death or serious bodily harm. the
shot that did hit the van hit it at a height that if it had hit one of the passengers,
it would have hit them in the body or head. when all these circumstances are
considered in their entirety, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt when mr.
thomas-henry was discharging his firearm he was doing so with the intention of
endangering the lives of the persons associated with the van. see also: r. v.
boomhower,
o.j. no. 709
. as such, findings of guilt are made out on these
counts as well.
this leaves the non-firearm related charges to
be dealt with. starting with counts 14 and 15, the assaults on ashley and rikki
general, i am not satisfied the crown has proven these charges beyond a
reasonable doubt. the evidence as to how the altercation started when the van
reached mr. thomas-henry’s house and who did what to whom, is too unclear to determine
to the standard necessary in a criminal case. there are inconsistencies between
the witnesses in whether mr. thomas-henry got out of the van when asked,
whether rikki general had to pull him out or whether he got out only after rikki
went to his door. also, if rikki pushed mr. thomas-henry first or he head
butted her or pressed his head into hers is also unclear. as such on these two
charges, findings of not guilty will also be made.
count 16 is a charge of making a threat to rikki
general. this is the threat referenced earlier that he would shoot the women.
it is alleged to have happened just prior to him entering his house and retrieving
the firearm. ms. greene testified as she was separating him from the other
women he yelled “fuck you, you fat bitch, do you want to get shot” as she was
holding him. ms. greene said he yelled this while looking behind her in the
direction of ashley and rikki. i am satisfied that mr. thomas-henry made this
threat as alleged. ms. greene was near him when he said it, she was clear in
recalling the precise words said and she was sober at the time. given all this,
i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt mr. thomas-henry uttered the words
alleged and they constitute a threat and as a result this charge is made out.
this leaves only the driving related offences. count
17 is a charge of dangerous operation and count 27 is a count of driving while prohibited.
the police were initially dispatched to this matter a few minutes before 2:00
am. officers responded to the scene of the shooting but did not enter the
residence. a couple officers remained there without seeing the accused or
anyone else until they were called away to an unrelated matter. other officers
attended to the location the complainants had fled to. at 3:52 am officers troy
monture and quinn powless were driving past the accused’s residence when they
saw a vehicle pull out of the driveway. it was a dark coloured suv with tinted
windows. they were unable to see how many people were in the vehicle or who the
driver was. they turned their cruiser around to stop the suv and when they
activated their lights and sirens, it fled at a high rate of speed. officer
powless testified he was trying to catch up to it and reached speeds of 150 kmh
and still was unable to do so. at one point the suv failed to stop at an
intersection controlled by a 4 way stop sign. eventually, the officers lost
sight of it.
a few minutes later they again saw the suv on a
road that led into gaylord powless arena in ohsweken. officer powless pulled
his cruiser into the arena through a different entrance that allowed him to
approach the suv head on. when the suv saw the police, it did a u-turn and
again fled away. at this time, it was travelling at approximately 80kmh in a 40
or 50 kmh zone. it reached a sharp right-hand bend in the road which it was
unable to navigate due to its speed. it entered the ditch and rolled onto its driver’s
side. officers monture and powless were directly behind it as this happened.
they immediately exited their cruiser and as they approached the suv, mr.
thomas-henry was attempting to exit through the upturned passenger side window.
they extracted him from the vehicle and arrested him. at no time did they
observe any other person emerge from the suv.
the defence has argued i ought not be satisfied
the crown has proven that mr. thomas-henry was the driver of the suv. they
point to the fact it had tinted windows which prevented the officers from
seeing inside during the time it was in operation and the fact they lost sight
of the vehicle for a few minutes. i disagree. i am satisfied mr. thomas-henry
was the lone occupant of the suv the entire time. this is based on the circumstances
at the time. it was nearly 4:00 am, the person driving felt the need to flee
from the police not once but twice, and when the suv finally did come to a
rest, mr. thomas-henry was the only person inside. when taken together, i am
satisfied that the crown has proven mr. thomas-henry was the driver of the suv.
given his admission he was a prohibited driver
at the time, this means the count of driving prohibited has been proven. the
remaining issue is whether the driving amounted to dangerous operation.
again, i am satisfied it did. mr. thomas-henry
purposely fled from the police at speeds in excess of 150kmh. he failed to stop
at least one stop sign, he then fled from police again at an excessive speed,
failed to negotiate a bend in the road and crashed into a ditch, flipping his
vehicle onto its side. at the time he was arrested, the officers indicate he
was exhibiting signs of being under the influence of alcohol. when taken
together, i find this driving behaviour, in these circumstances was a marked
departure from the standard of care a reasonable person would drive at the time
and as such, the crown has proven this count beyond a reasonable doubt too.
conclusion
to conclude then, the following findings will be
made on the counts mr. thomas-henry faces.
on counts 1 to 5, being the attempt murder
counts, given the crown’s concession, there will be not guilty findings.
on counts 6 to 10, the pointing of a firearm
count, there will findings of guilt.
on count 11, careless use of a firearm, there
will be a finding of guilt.
on counts 12 and 13, possess firearm without a
licence and knowingly possessing a firearm while unlicenced there will be not
guilty findings.
on counts 14 and 15, the assault charges, there
will be not guilty findings.
on count 16, the uttering a threat count, there
will be a finding of guilt.
on count 17, dangerous operation of a motor
vehicle, there will be a finding of guilt.
on count 18, failing to comply with the keep the
peace term of a probation order, there will be a finding of guilt.
on counts 19 to 23, the charges of discharging a
firearm with the intent to endanger lives, there will be findings of guilt.
on count 24, weapons dangerous, there will be a
finding of guilt.
on count 25, failing to comply with a no weapons
term of a probation order there will be a finding of guilt.
on count 26, breaching a firearms prohibition
order, there will be a finding of guilt.
and last, on count 27, driving while prohibited,
there will be a finding of guilt.
released:  october 2, 2025
signed:
justice robert s. gee