ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. callaghan
, 2025 oncj 722
date:
2025 10 17
court
file no.:  belleville 24-13101554
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
john patrick
callaghan
before
justice r. b. horton
heard
on july 24, 2025, july 28, 2025, and august 29, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 17, 2025
m. lunski.............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
m. pretsell............................................ counsel
for the accused john patrick callaghan
horton j.:
background
mr. john callaghan stands charged with two counts
of sexual assault against ms. s.m. on july 10, 2024, and july 20, 2024,
contrary to
section 271
of the
criminal code
.
the court made an order banning publication of
the name of the complainant, or any information which could identify her,
pursuant to s. 486.4 ccc.
the crown called two witnesses, the complainant,
s.m., and ms. anne marie maloney, a nurse with the domestic violence sexual
assault response program, to provide observational evidence and not expert
evidence.
the defence called two witnesses, the accused,
mr. callaghan, and ms. torin moore, a friend of the accused, present on the
july 20, 2024, alleged offence date.
this case requires the determination of:
(1)
whether, on july 10, 2024, the accused sexually
assaulted the complainant by undoing her bra and lifting her shirt to expose
her breasts and touching her breasts absent the consent of the complainant.
(2)
whether, on july 20, 2024, the accused sexually
assaulted the complainant, by commencing consensual sexual intercourse and by
ejaculating inside the complainant’s vagina, and if so whether the complainant
stated she did not consent to such intercourse with internal ejaculation or had
withheld consent to sexual intercourse if internal ejaculation was a
requirement.  most of the evidence in this case was uncontested.
uncontested evidence
the complainant and the accused first
met when they were in high school, approximately two decades ago.  they
reconnected in june 2024, when they ran into each other in belleville, ontario.
the complainant and the accused exchanged numerous text messages
from approximately june 20, 2024, to july 23, 2024. a number of these text
message were sexual in nature.
the complainant and the accused met in person on a number of
occasions between june 20, 2024, and july 23, 2024. on july 17, 2024, they
exchanged a series of text messages discussing the way they would engage in
sexual intercourse. specifically, these text messages indicate planning between
them to have unprotected sexual intercourse, or sexual intercourse without a
condom. in this text exchange, the parties also discuss the accused ejaculating
inside the complainant’s vagina.
the complainant told police she was consistently clear with the
accused that she was not comfortable with him ejaculating inside her vagina. in
this text exchange she does not indicate that the accused is not permitted to
ejaculate inside her vagina.
on july 10, 2024, the complainant and the accused went on a date.
they returned to the accused’s residence and as they were hugging goodbye, they
became passionate, holding each other and kissing.  the complainant’s hand
touching the accused’s penis through his pants. the accused unclipped the
complainant’s bra from the back. the complainant immediately told the accused that
his actions were not ok and told him to clip her bra back on (count 1).
the complainant states the accused proceeded to take hold of the
front of her shirt and pull her shirt up, exposing her breasts and touching
them. the accused states he immediately did her bra up and the complainant
immediately left the residence. the complainant confronted the accused via
phone call later that night and expressed how that was not ok, the accused
apologized, and the complainant accepted this as sincere.
on july 20, 2024, the parties engaged in sexual intercourse at the
accused’s home, at the complainant’s request, without using a condom. both
parties agree they consented to this sexual intercourse. the issue however was
the accused having ejaculated inside the complainant’s vagina (count 2), the complainant
stating it was without consent and, in fact, was expressly prohibited. the
accused argues that the complainant’s refusal to this act was not a “hard no”
and that it was simply a natural occurrence during sexual intercourse.
following this encounter between the parties, the complainant
indicated to the accused via text message that she was “not mad” but wanted
assurance from him. she requested that the parties meet in-person to discuss
the sexual intercourse that took place on july 20, 2024. the accused was unable
to meet with the complainant in-person in the days following due to work
obligations.
on july 22, 2024, the complainant asked the accused, via text
message, to apologize to her for ejaculating inside her vagina. the accused
indicated that he would prefer to talk in-person about the matter.
on august 7, 2024, the complainant attended at the ontario
provincial police, central hastings detachment, to report an allegation of
sexual assault related to the sexual intercourse between the parties on july
20, 2024, and an additional allegation of sexual assault relating to the
earlier alleged incident.
the applicable law
mr. callaghan is presumed innocent.  he does not
have to prove anything.  he does not have to raise a reasonable doubt.  the
crown must prove the essential elements of each offence beyond a reasonable
doubt.  this burden of proof rests on the crown throughout the trial and never
shifts to the accused.  a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt.
it must not be based upon sympathy or prejudice.  rather, it is based on reason
and common sense.  it is logically derived from the evidence or absence of
evidence.  the crown is not required to prove the offence to an absolute
certainty.  such a standard of proof is impossibly high (
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 320).
in assessing the evidence in this case, i must
follow the principles and analysis set out by the supreme court of canada in r.
v. w.d., [1991)
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 742 as follows,
first, if you believe
the evidence of the accused you must acquit;
second, if you
do not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in reasonable
doubt by it you must acquit;
third, even if
you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself
whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, you are convinced
beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt of the accused.
a trial is not a contest of credibility between
witnesses or a matter of choosing sides.  the
w. d.
analysis precludes
and “either\or” approach to the assessment of credibility.  as the court of
appeal stated in
r. v. mackenzie
,
2020 onca 646
, at para.
22
, “a jury
cannot determine guilt simply by deciding which of two competing versions of
the relevant events it believes.  an accused must be acquitted if the jury has
a reasonable doubt of any of the essential elements of the offence, even if the
jury does not believe the accused’s version of events”.
credibility
and reliability
credibility and reliability are not identical
concepts.  credibility refers to the honesty of the witness.  was the witness
telling the truth when he or she gave their evidence?  reliability refers to
the accuracy of the witness’s evidence.  did the witness accurately receive the
information, accurately remember the information, and accurately relate the
information in their testimony?  a witness may be honest (i.e. credible) but
simply wrong in relating past events (i.e. not reliable).
where there are significant inconsistencies or
contradictions within a witnesses’ testimony, or when considered against other
conflicting evidence in the case, i must carefully assess the evidence before
concluding that guilt has been established.  in all cases the court must be
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt on the issue of credibility where the case
turns on the evidence of two conflicting witnesses
that said, it must be remembered that
corroboration is legally not required to sustain a conviction.  indeed, it is
an error in law to hold that “there never can be a conviction absent
confirmation of the complainant’s testimony in a case of sexual assault where
the only witnesses are the complainant and the accused” (
r. v. b. (r.t.)
onca 177 at para 19.).
to make decisions on the issues of credibility
and reliability i must consider carefully and with an open mind all the
evidence presented during the trial.  it is up to the trier of fact to decide
how much, or little, is believed and relied upon from the testimony upon the
testimony of any witness.  the trier of fact may believe some, none, or all of
it.
sexual
assault
sexual assault is a general intent offence, the
crown must prove the following essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt:
(i)
the accused intentionally applied force to the
complainant;
(ii)
the complainant did not consent to the force
applied;
(iii)
the accused knew that the complainant did not
consent to the force applied, or was wilfully blind to the complainant’s lack
of consent; and
(iv)
that the force the accused applied took place in
circumstances of a sexual nature so as to violate the complainant’s sexual
integrity.
there are two routes of establishing the absence
of consent.  the crown can prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant
did not provide consent, or alternatively, that the complainant, while
ostensibly consenting, lacked the capacity to consent.  if no consent is
established beyond a reasonable doubt the trier of fact need not go further to
address the complainant’s capacity to consent. (
r. v. g.f.
2019 onca 493 (canlii)
, onca
493, 378 c.c.c. (3d) 518.
section 273.1 (1)
c.c.c.
defines consent
as being,
“the voluntary
agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question.”
r v. ewanchuk
1999 canlii 711 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 330 is of assistance in determining whether the complainant
subjectively consented to sexual activity at the relevant time in question.
the
actus reus
does not require complainant to voice objection or
otherwise express a lack of consent. (
ewanchuk
at para.
19
.).
s. 273.1(2) c.c.c.
specifies that consent requires the complainant to be capable of
consenting.  the complainant must provide conscious agreement to every sexual
act at the specific time.
the
mens rea
of sexual assault is
established with proof of the accused’s general intention to touch the
complainant, together with proof that the complainant did not consent, or that
the accused was reckless or wilfully blind to the absence of consent. (
r. v.
ewanchuk
at para.
42
).
determining whether an accused took reasonable
steps to ascertain consent is a quasi-objective and case specific exercise that
takes into consideration the circumstances known to the accused and considers
how a reasonable person would respond in the specific circumstance. (
r. v.
crangle
2010 onca 451 (canlii)
, onca 451, 256 c.c.c. (3d) 234 at para.
29
).
finally, there is no such concept as “implied
consent” based upon a pre-existing relationship or the silence, passivity, or
ambiguous conduct” of the complainant. (r. v.
ewanchuk
at para.
51
).  complainant is not obliged to offer even minimal
words or gestures of objection to be said to not consent. (
r. v. m.l.m
.
1994 canlii 77 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 3,
r. v. j.a
. s.c.c. 28 at para.
37).
in considering whether consent was received, or
whether the accused had an honest but mistaken belief of consent, i must
consider the complainant’s actual communicative behaviour, whether words,
actions or in combination, as well as the totality of the admissible and
relevant evidence explaining how the accused perceived that behaviour
communicated the required consent (
r. v. barton
s.c.c. 33 at para. 91).  in essence, did the accused commit the
actus reus
of the
offence while mistakenly believing facts that negate, or raise a reasonable
doubt, about the fault element.
with these principles in mind, i now turn to my
summary of the evidence.
the accused’s evidence
the accused is 38 years old and lives in tweed,
ontario.  he is divorced and has 4 children. he is self-employed as an
electrician and does farming.
he and the complainant knew each other in
passing during high school and had no contact following high school.
in late june 2024, they met unexpectedly at a
restaurant, had a short discussion and exchanged contact coordinates.
the pair proceeded to text one another, to meet
for lunch on occasion, and went to each other’s homes for visits.
the pair had been seeing one another for a few
weeks when, on july 10, 2024, the complainant had come to the accused’s home
for a visit.  as the complainant was preparing to leave the two began to kiss
in the driveway, this escalated to touching.  the accused testifying that the
complainant began to touch his penis through his pants, on her own accord.
the accused testified he assumed this was an
indication allowing him to touch her and he reached under her shirt and
unclipped her bra. the complainant told him no and asked he immediately do it
back up and he did within seconds.
he expressly denied either lifting her shirt up
to expose her breasts, or having touched them.
the accused testified that he believed with the
nature of their “making out”, and her touching his penis, that his actions were
welcomed as the next logical step.
during cross-examination, the accused denied the
suggestion that he had placed the complainant’s hand on his penis, stating that
it was purely her action.
as a result of the complainant’s reaction, the
accused apologized.  he testified that the complainant was satisfied with his apology
and accepted it fully.  they exchanged emails in which the accused apologized
further and the complainant advised him that neither “are mind readers and they
are learning each other’s thoughts, opinions, feelings and everything…..don’t
sweat the small stuff.”
during cross-examination the accused denied
explicitly that his apology was for exposing her breasts.
the accused and complainant exchanged further
texts, many discussing sexual interests, birth control and ejaculation.  in general,
both parties characterized these exchanges as getting to know each other.
the accused testified that he understood the
complainant to be concerned with ejaculation inside of her due to hygienic
issues, that this was not a “hard no”, but that she was not fond of it.
on july 20, 2024, the complainant visited the
accused at his residence, arriving shortly before the accused had finished
working his fields.  initially no one else was present at the residence.  the
accused finished work, met the complainant outside, and as they spoke his
friend, torin moore, arrived and later another individual.  they all chatted
for a while and torin went outside while the other individual left.
the accused showered, and he and the complainant
left to pick up dinner while torin remained at the property.
they placed a dinner order and drove around
waiting for it to be ready.  as they drove, they began speaking of sexually
related topics.  the accused denied in his testimony any discussion regarding
ejaculation.
after picking up dinner they returned home,
while torin was still there, they had no interaction.  as the accused laid out
dinner, the complainant began kissing him, took his hand and stated, “let’s go
upstairs to fuck”.  while the accused noted that torin was present the
complainant advised she would not be aware and led him upstairs.
the accused testified that once upstairs in his
bedroom, the complainant took her underwear off and straddled him on the bed,
he was naked.  they continued, with the accused standing in front of the complainant
as they engaged in intercourse.
the accused testified that there was no
discussion of his ejaculating inside of the complainant.
during cross-examination, he testified that he
knew she was uncomfortable with internal ejaculation but believed that she was
“open to it” as a result of their conversations.
the accused testified that, simultaneous to his
beginning to ejaculate, he announced he was cumming.  in reply, the complainant
said “no!”.  the accused testified he stepped away, handed her a towel, and the
complainant went into the bathroom.  the complainant, he said, did not shower,
dressed, came downstairs, took her car keys, and left without a word to him.
in cross-examination, the accused stated he
always intended to ejaculate noting that that is part of intercourse.
the complainant text messaged the accused at 7:46
pm stating,
“johnny i’m
not mad, please don’t think i’m mad.  but i’m panicking. i could really use
some assurance from you right now.  could you call me when you have a second.”
the accused responded at 9:01 pm,
“hey (s.m.),
i was busy trying to get some hay done.  am exhausted and i’ll give you a call
tomorrow.  lots to think about tonight that’s for sure. am sorry for making you
uncomfortable.  i really like cumming.  i really don’t know; i just need some time
i guess.”
the complainant than responded advising she was
in the accused’s driveway.
the accused testified that he stood at the front
door and spoke with the complainant, and she left a second time. in cross-examination,
he could not recall whether the complainant raised the issue of his ejaculating
inside of her.  he stated he believed she was upset because of his not
answering her texts as this had been an issue in the past when he was busy.
he testified that he was not aware ejaculation
was the issue.  the accused in cross-examination explained his text message “i
didn’t know cumming was a nono” was related to his belief she was upset over
his pre-mature ejaculation. he continued to deny that the complainant ever told
him that he could not ejaculate within her, whether prior to or on july 20,
2024.
the accused testified during cross-examination,
that he never asked or sought clarity as they went upstairs or as they began to
engage in sex regarding the issue of ejaculating inside the complainant.  similarly,
he denied that the complainant told him not to do so.  he maintained that, he
believed, she was consenting to his ejaculating inside of her as “that is part
of intercourse”. he based this on the fact that she guided him upstairs and stated,
“let’s fuck”, again tying intercourse to ejaculation.
the accused agreed to the suggestion by the
crown that intercourse could end with ejaculation elsewhere or not at all, but
in his view, he maintained that her initiating sex equated to her wanting him
to ejaculate inside of her.
the accused disagreed that he was aware this was
not what the complainant wanted to occur.  he was questioned in regard to the
complainant’s text to him about sexual acts in which she stated,
“i have
limits though.  anal, absolutely not. no photos or recordings.  no threesome.
nothing dirty that’ll mess my hygiene.”
the accused advised he
believed this to reference blood or feces. despite their conversations he
denied that this could include ejaculation.
they continued to exchange texts.  the
complainant advised she had been used and requested all pictures she forwarded
to him be deleted.  in response the accused states,
“am a
straight shooter also (s.m.), am sorry i didn’t know cumming in you was a nono
for you.  i am fixed and tested my baby days are over unfortunately…..”
in cross-examination, the accused was asked why,
if he didn’t know the issue was his having ejaculated inside of her, that he
wrote about not being aware it was a “nono”.  he responded he did not know,
thought it was about his poor performance and than acknowledged that the
complainant was not fond of it but, again, did not realize it was a “hard no”.
he knew she said it caused her discomfort but again said was not “a hard no.”
the complainant responds july 21, 2024, at 12:14
am, advising she had taken the morning after pill to be certain. she states she
hates putting chemicals in her body that mess with her hormones.
on july 22, 2024, she texts the accused,
“… i think
your apology for ejaculating inside my vagina was a very back-handed apology.
i told you many times before it was “no”, i explained in different ways why it
was “no”. and before we started having sex i said “no you cannot cum inside me”
and while were having sex doggystyle with you grabbing my ass and holding the
small of my back down, you said you wanted to fill me up with your cum and i
right there also told you “no”.
and you did
it anyway.  you ejaculated inside of me, and you knew i asked you not too.
where your
apology is backhanded is in the same sentence you apologized you also said you
didn’t know i wasn’t okay with it.  when in fact you did know it was a “no”
from me many times.
your back
handed apology puts the blame on me and absolves you from taking the
accountability for your disrespect.
…”
the accused responds by stating he would like
the opportunity to apologize in person.  this does not occur.
the accused denies that he was aware that
ejaculating, as he did was not agreeable to the complainant.  he testified that
he believed the complainant to be upset because of his “performance” and the
fact she was not satisfied.
the parties did not communicate further and
approximately 10 days later the accused was arrested on the charges before this
court.
several further texts were raised during
examination of the accused, predating the alleged offences.  they were properly
the subject of an earlier s. 276/278 application in which the parties consented
to their being filed with the court to be used in cross-examination.  the court
ruled that these text messages, between the parties, were relevant as to the
issue of ejaculation and the communications that occurred prior to the incident
in question.
these texts were filed as exhibits within the
trial proper and may be summarized as follows:
in or about
july 1, 2024,
accused:                    “wish
you were ready me right now”
“cum
in you filling you up”
“…”
complainant:            “you
like cream pie? lol”
accused:                  “love
to you, you?
complainant:            “it’s
not really my thing, can cause discomfort afterwards”
accused:                  “o
really?”
complainant:            “i would normally suggest condoms but i
don’t think that’s your style”
accused:                  “am
not a fan of them”
complainant:            “but i’ve only done the deed 5 maybe 6 times
in the last 2 years including you.”
“so i’m not on birth control and i don’t want to be either.”
“hate to ruin your arousal. sorry bout that.”
“sleep tight johnny muah!”
accused:                  “am
fixed don’t you know that?”
complainant:             “yeah
i do, lol”
“but imma paranoid woman”
“would you be open to getting std hiv testing with me?”
“start this on a clean slate inna matter of speaking”
“im very open
to unprotected sex with you especially cause your vasectomy, but condoms
prevent most sti’s or greatly reduce the risk”
no response was ever made to this last question although
the accused believed it may have been further discussed by telephone.
the accused testified that the complainant never
said that ejaculating in her vagina was an absolute no.
the accused testified he was never asked to wear
a condom.
the complainant’s evidence
the complainant is 39 years old, divorced, and
has two children.
she described the relationship with the accused
as dreamy and that she quickly became “smitten”. she noted the accused was a
good listener and seemed to really understand her.
the parties, she testified, talked regularly
either by phone, text or in person.
in regards to the incident of unhooking her bra,
the complainant was very clear in her evidence that while they were kissing and
holding each other as she was leaving, it was the accused who placed her hand
on his penis, outside his pants, and that when he unclipped her bra his
response to her asking him to do it up was to pull up her top , exposing her
breasts. she testified she didn’t cause a scene and readily accepted his
apology as it seemed very sincere.
the complainant maintained however she did not
want him to undo her bra, or expose her breasts, and did not consent to this nor
was she even asked by the accused if he could take this step.
in relation to the events of july 20, 2024, largely
the complainant’s evidence and the accused were aligned.  the significant
differences related to the prior conversations and text discussions surrounding
the views and preferences of the complainant and particularly internal
ejaculation.  the complainant was steadfast in her testimony that this topic
had been discussed, on multiple occasions, in which she was clear that internal
ejaculation was an absolute no for her.
she was very clear that she viewed this as
increasing her risk, not only of pregnancy, but communicable disease and
disrupting her hygiene and possibly causing discomfort.  despite significant
cross-examination on this topic, she was consistent in her evidence.
she confirmed in her testimony to having made it
clear to the accused her consent to unprotected intercourse, but not to his
ejaculating inside of her vagina.
the complainant testified that while out
driving, waiting for their food order, they had a pointed conversation, setting
boundaries as to what they like in sexual relations.  she was adamant having
again stated she was not agreeable to internal ejaculation.
the complainant confirmed within her testimony
that she consented to, and in fact initiated, sex with the accused on july 20,
2024. she testified that he told her he wanted to “fill me with cum”, to which
she again told him no and felt he understood. she expressed this, she
testified, loud enough that there could be no doubt the accused heard her.
as they engaged in sex, the accused was
positioned behind the complainant, who was on her hands and knees, with the
accused pushing her down by the small of her back, keeping her in this
position. she testified he again asked to cum inside her and she again said no.
his response was to advise he was cumming, without even an attempt to withdraw.
the complainant then ran to the bathroom, upset,
nauseous, and feeling like she was gagging. she testified to quickly showering,
to rinse off, and leaving quickly.
the complainant testified, after leaving the
accused’s residence, she first went home and arranged care for her daughter, then
drove to the mall where she texted the accused, the 7:46 text.  she than drove
back to the accused’s home, where she described being greeted coldly, the
accused being dismissive.  she left, drove to a drug store and purchased the
morning after pill.
ultimately, the complainant went to the hospital
on july 22
nd
and met with ms. maloney, a sexual assault nurse.  she
had a full examination and received anti std medication.
on august 1, 2024, the complainant attended the
police station and gave her statement initiating the charges before this court.
analysis and conclusion
july 10, 2024 – the bra incident
the parties were significantly opposed as to the
extent of this incident.  while both state they were kissing and touching,
perhaps some moans being expressed, the complainant testified that the accused
placed her hand on his penis through his clothes, went up her shirt and
proceeded to undue her bra.  she demanded he do it back up, a request she
testified was initially ignored as the accused lifted her top and bra, exposing
her breasts.  she added that he touched her breasts, an element which was not
contained within her statement to police.  she initially indicated that she
thought of this as a mistake which occurred largely through miscommunications,
although later in her evidence she walked back her comment of mistake.
the accused indicated in his testimony that it
was the complainant who, on her own accord, touched his penis.  he believed
things were advancing, that she welcomed this involvement and proceeded to
undue her bra.  there was no evidence received of the complainant having
indicated her displeasure as he undid the bra though the accused readily
acknowledged she stopped him immediately and demanded it be re-fastened, which
he said he did without delay.  he denied any lifting of the top or touching of
her breasts.
while, generally, i found the complainant to be
credible in relation to this incident, there were areas of concern.  the fact
that her evidence appears to have expanded at trial, to the accused having
touched her breasts, is a concern that must be considered in the overall
determination of this issue but alone it is not, in my view, determinative.
equally, while there does not appear to have been any steps to stop the accused
who admittedly fumbled to undue the clasps of the bra, i am unwilling to
speculate as to the total time this fumbling occurred.
what is to be determined is whether the accused
acted on consent, or mistaken belief of the complainant’s consent, to
unfastening of the bra.  i am left with a situation in which the parties each
acknowledge that they were kissing, holding each other, and in general making
out.  i am unable to say who placed the complainant’s hand on the accused’s
penis, but it was admitted by both parties as being touched by the complainant.
i lean towards the complainant’s own initial description of the event being a
mistake, a misreading of the situation.  i find the accused to have taken what
can be described as the next incremental step, reaching up and undoing the
bra.
i am unable, on the evidence received, to
determine if the complainant’s top was lifted after this, or if her breasts
were touched, given the opposing evidence, the difference between the
complainant’s police statement and her testimony at trial, the complainant’s use
of the term “mistake,” and the absence of any comments within her texts of such
touching.
in light of these concerns, i find that each
party’s testimony is plausible.  as a result, i simply can not determine who to
believe, it is not that i disbelieve the complainant or find her to be
dishonest.  this result comes from the criminal process itself.
as a result, i am left with a reasonable doubt.
the accused is therefore found not guilty of
this count.
july 20, 2024 – ejaculation incident
the parties were very much aligned in their
evidence of this incident in so far as the evening unfolding, leading up to the
accused and complainant engaging in consensual intercourse.  the issue is
whether the complainant voiced her unwillingness to have sexual intercourse
with internal ejaculation.  in other words, was her consent to intercourse
conditional on a requirement that the accused not ejaculate inside her vagina?
the testimony of the complainant on this issue
was credible, bolstered by the text conversations between the parties.  i find
that this issue was not only discussed on several occasions, but that the
complainant stressed this was a significant concern for her.  she cited her
concerns of pregnancy, communicable disease and hygiene, together with her
finding it at times to be uncomfortable.
i find that this issue was discussed between the parties in the days
leading up to this incident, and further on the day of the incident as they
were driving around waiting on their food order. to be specific, i find the
accused was aware of the concerns of the complainant, and her unwillingness to
have sexual intercourse with internal ejaculation.
the court had areas of concern with respect to the accused’s
credibility. for example, the accused testified that he believed the
complainant left without a word after the july 20
th
incident because
of his poor performance, denying he was aware she was upset over his having
ejaculated inside of here.  he was challenged on this in cross-examination and
maintained he did not know that her being upset was as a result of his
ejaculation.  he advised that the complainant never raised this directly.  when
challenged as to the text message he sent the complainant following her leaving,
in which he states,
“hey (s.m.),
i was busy trying to get some hay done.  am exhausted and i’ll give you a call
tomorrow.  lots to think about tonight that’s for sure. am sorry for making you
uncomfortable.  i really like cuming.  i really don’t know; i just need some
time i guess.”
and later,
““am a
straight shooter also (s.m.), am sorry i didn’t know cumming in you was a nono
for you.  i am fixed and tested my baby days are over unfortunately…..”
there is no mention of performance
issues, or apologies, that would suggest a different concern being understood
by the accused. the accused’s statements are inconsistent with his reasoning
offered to the court. this is highly problematic to the accused’s position that
he did not know why the complainant was so upset.
ultimately, having determined that the complainant advised she was
not comfortable with internal ejaculation, with her having explained it in a
number of ways why she was uncomfortable, and having told the accused,
including the day of the incident “no”, this court finds that the sexual act
consented to was penetrative intercourse
in the absence of internal
ejaculation
.
just as consent can be withdrawn at any time during the act, it is
equally the case that the complainant could vacate her condition of no internal
ejaculation.  that is not what i find occurred.  the complainant always
maintained this position, including in the moments leading up to the act when
she reiterated to the accused that he was not to ejaculate inside of her.  this,
though not corroborating, is reflected in her testimony of her strong response
when the accused expressed, he was cumming, and she said no, and then, “you
fucking did it”, as she got up from the bed and went to the bathroom.
i find that the complainant communicated her position to the accused,
that he was not to ejaculate internally.  the crown properly submits that this
would have required communicated consent by the complainant, through either
words or her actions.  i find no evidence either in the words spoken by the
complainant, or in her actions, which would have informed the accused that the
complainant had changed her stated position and now consented to his
ejaculating inside of her.
the issue of honest but mistaken belief in consent must be
examined.  certainly, this could form a possible defence.  to establish such a
defence the accused needs to be found to have honestly held the belief that the
complainant had consented to the act in question, and he must show that he had
taken reasonable steps in the specific circumstances to ascertain that in fact
she was consenting to the act.
in sexual assault there in no doctrine of implied consent.  it is an
error in law to assume that because the complainant does not say “no” that by
not doing so the complainant is saying “yes” to the act.
repeated throughout the accused ‘s testimony was the suggestion that
the complainant’s “no” or refusal to have the accused ejaculate inside of her
was “not a hard no”.  i do not find that whether a complainant uttered a “hard
no”, “a soft no”, or any other form of negative verbiage, matters whatsoever.
to” be clear, any form of “no” is simply that – no. there is no way in which
any person can substitute an affirmative communication on such an issue where
an explicit negative direction has been stated.
there must be reasonable steps shown to be taken by an accused
person in the circumstances known to determine if actual consent is being
advanced.  simply stated, the accused needed to take affirmative action to
ascertain whether the complainant was consenting.  here, the complainant was
uncomfortable with sexual intercourse involving internal ejaculation, and i
find her position was voiced both in direct conversation with the accused and
through text with the accused.
the complainant was very courageous, within a new relationship, at
its earliest days, she expressed that this was not something she was
comfortable with, the reasoning is only secondary.  she set the parameters of
her consent.
the accused clearly understood this fact.  even disregarding the
texts filed with the court, or the complainant’s own evidence, the accused
continually referred to her position as not being a “hard no”, spoke of
ejaculation internally as being a part of intercourse, or that she suggested
she might be “open to it”.  no evidence was received that the accused inquired
further, beyond his own slanted view, an irrelevant view, to ascertaining the
consent of the other person involved.  he had no conversation with the
complainant beyond expressing to her that he “wanted to fill her with cum” and
perhaps asking her again if he could.  i find this was answered by the complainant
who said no.
on this basis i reject any notion of honest but mistaken belief.
the accused’s explanation in part was based on this position that
the complainant initiated the intimacy.  it does not matter which party
initiated the act, the agreement at this time to have intercourse was on the
condition that the accused was not to ejaculate inside of the complainant’s
vagina.  these boundaries were known.  the accused in engaging with the
complainant had an obligation to comply with her terms, or to disengage.  in
continuing in the manner he did, was to accept his responsibility to abide by
these terms, whether he fully accepted her reasoning or not.  he was to respect
her wishes, her bodily integrity, her sexual autonomy and her dignity.
at the immediacy of the offending behaviour, his ejaculation, the
accused was in complete control.  the complainant was with no means able to
disengage or prevent him from disregarding her terms.  he chose to disregard
her concerns, her condition to proceeding as she did and stole from her the
very essence of her sexual autonomy.
conclusion
in summary, i find that the accused and complainant engaged
initially in consensual vaginal intercourse.  discussions occurred prior to the
sexual act that the complainant did not approve of internal ejaculation for
reasons voiced including, risk of pregnancy, std’s and hygiene concerns.  the
two engaged in the act willingly.  during their having sex, the accused was
positioned in a way in which he was in total control of whether he ejaculated
inside the complainant, elsewhere or not at all.  being aware of her concerns,
the accused took no action, reasonable or otherwise, to determine whether her
willingness to accept internal ejaculation had changed.  the accused proceeded
to ejaculate inside of the complainant being aware of the complainant’s terms
of engagement.  her consent to sexual intercourse was tied to the understanding
that the accused would not ejaculate inside of her.  the court accepts the
evidence of the complainant on this issue.
the court rejects any suggestion that the accused lacked physical
control of when or where he ejaculated.  if this was an issue, the complainant
had raised the issue of condoms, trusting the accused she agreed to forego
same.
the court explicitly rejects that this was an unintentional act by
the accused, who in his testimony referred to internal ejaculation as a natural
part of intercourse. he rejected the concerns of the complainant, describing
her stated position as “not a hard no”.  the accused carried on as he alone
wished, and in doing so entirely ignored the condition in which the complainant
had granted her consent.
the court finds the accused guilty of sexual assault.
signed: justice r. b. horton