ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. zhang
, 2025 oncj 176
date:  2025 04 03
court
file no.: 22- 40003134
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jun-feng zhang
before
justice c. faria
heard
on may 27, 28, 29, november 5, 6, 21, 26, 2024, and january 14, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 3, 2025
daniel desantis.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
jake shen....................................................... counsel
for the accused jun-feng zhang
faria j.:
i.
introduction
jun-feng zhang is charged with three counts of
sexual assault on yc regarding three separate events that allegedly occurred
between mid-april and the end of may 2022.
the crown proceeded by indictment and called the
complainant as its only witness. mr. zhang testified in his defence and filed numerous
messages exchanged between himself and yc during the relevant time period.
the trial took some time to complete as it was
the subject two motion for directions on a defence s. 278 application, both
before the trial, and mid-trial, as well as two s. 11(b) applications, both
before trial, and mid-trial, both of which were dismissed.
evidence was heard during 3 days in may 2024,
and for 4 days in november 2024, with submissions on january 14, 2025.
the central is issue is the credibility and
reliability of the witnesses.
ii.
legal principles
as in every criminal case, mr. zhang is presumed innocent. the
burden rests on the crown to prove each essential element of the offence beyond
a reasonable doubt. the burden never shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based
on reason and common sense from the evidence or lack of evidence.
the crown must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that:
i.
mr. zhang touched yc directly or indirectly.
ii.
he touched her intentionally.
iii.
the touching took place in circumstances of a
sexual nature.
iv.
yc did not consent to the sexual activity in
question.
v.
mr. zhang knew that yc did not consent to the sexual
activity in question.
i instruct myself not to approach the evidence
with unwarranted assumptions as to what is or is not sexual assault, what is or
is not consent, or what kind of person may or may not be a complainant of
sexual assault. i also instruct myself not to make unwarranted assumptions on
the kind of person who may or may not commit a sexual assault, or what a person
who is being, or has been, sexually assaulted will or will not do or say.
there is no typical victim or typical assailant or typical situation or typical
reaction.
when considering the credibility and reliability
of a witness, i may accept some, none, or all of a witness’ evidence.
credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth. reliability
relates to the actual accuracy of the testimony.  the credibility and
reliability of a witness must be “tested in the light of all the other evidence
presented.”
as the defence raised the issue of motive, i instruct myself
that the accused is not required to demonstrate the complainant had a motive to
fabricate evidence.  nor does the absence of a motive to fabricate conclusively
establish that a complainant is telling the truth.  “the presence or absence of
a motive to fabricate evidence is only one factor to be considered in assessing
credibility”.
as
mr. zhang testified in his defence, the applicable analytical framework is that
of
w.(d.).
:
i.
if i accept the evidence of mr. zhang, i must acquit him.
ii.
even if i do not accept the evidence of mr. zhang, if his evidence
raises a reasonable doubt, i must acquit him.
iii.
even if i do not accept the evidence of mr. zhang, nor does it raise a
reasonable doubt, on the totality of the evidence i do accept, i must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt the crown has proven every element of each offence.
iii.
position of the parties
the defence submits the court should reject the
evidence of the complainant, accept the evidence of mr. zhang, and acquit him
of all three counts.  he submits there are 4 reasons to reject yc’s evidence:
i.
yc was inconsistent and thus unreliable and not
credible.
ii.
an adverse inference should be made regarding
the timing of yc’s reporting the allegations to police.
iii.
yc has a motive to fabricate the allegations,
namely jealousy and revenge as mr. zhang did not assist her with her pursuit of
permanent status in canada; and
iv.
yc’s demeanour both post-offence and during her
testimony undermined her credibility.
the crown submits yc’s evidence should be
accepted as both credible and reliable. he argues yc’s evidence should be
reviewed through a trauma informed lens, and that the court should be cautious
of engaging in any analysis that relies on myths and stereotypes.  moreover, he
submits mr. zhang’s evidence was not credible, does not raise a reasonable
doubt and the crown has proven every element of each offence to the requisite
standard. therefore, mr. zhang should be found guilty of all charges.
iv.
summary of evidence
yc and mr. zhang met in february 2022, and they became
romantically involved shortly thereafter. mr. zhang moved into yc’s bedroom in
a rooming house at greenbush rd. in north york in march 2022. in april 2022,
they signed a lease to rent a whole house on vanda ave., but they broke up
before they moved into the new address.
count 1: sexual assault
yc testified that in mid-april she and mr. zhang
were consensually kissing and hugging on her bed when he removed her clothes,
and his own clothes. she asked him to use a condom before they engaged in
sexual intercourse, and he reached into the nearby cabinet and got one. she saw
him put it on himself. they had consensual vaginal intercourse. mr. zhang asked
her to turn over and lie face down on her bed, which she did. she felt him
vaginally penetrate her with his penis. shortly thereafter, she testified he
ejaculated on her back and she saw the condom on the floor.
yc asked mr. zhang why the condom was on the
floor. she testified mr. zhang said he had removed it. she asked him why he did
so. she testified that he responded that it felt better that way and said “it
is ok nothing is going to happen” because he had not ejaculated inside her.
they argued. then they showered separately and dressed. mr. zhang discarded the
condom and left. she said they had agreed that a condom was going to be used. she
testified she was very unhappy, disappointed, sad, and disturbed.  she had not
consented to have sexual intercourse without a condom.
mr. zhang’s version of events is that indeed he
engaged in consensual vaginal intercourse with yc in mid-april. that evening, he
reached into a nearby drawer, got a condom, and put it on himself before he
engaged in sexual intercourse.
he described that he penetrated yc as they faced
each other, then she turned over to lie face down on the bed and then he vaginally
penetrated her from behind. when he changed from this second position to a
third position, he testified that the condom “got stuck” in her vagina and slipped
off his penis.
mr. zhang testified he asked yc if he should get
another condom before he continued. she told him, “no, just don’t ejaculate”. he
threw the condom to the floor and continued penetrating her as they faced each
other. he then withdrew, masturbated, and ejaculated on her. he testified they
both showered afterward. there was no argument.
count 2: sexual assault
yc testified the relationship soured about a week
or two after the first alleged sexual assault, and she messaged mr. zhang and
broke up with him. when she returned home, mr. zhang had moved out.
prior to the breakup, yc testified she was
vomiting and felt sick. she did not think she was pregnant at first, but then
did a pregnancy test and learned she was. she told mr. zhang. mr. zhang asked
her to do the test again. he accepted she was pregnant. they discussed abortion
and he researched where she could get the medical procedure.  they made an
appointment at a clinic and attended together. yc was provided abortion medication
and told to attend follow up appointments.
yc testified she was at the new address the day
she took the first pill. she testified mr. zhang came to visit her and care for
her. she was in bed most of the time and unable to attend to herself. in the
afternoon, after work, he came to cook for her. he made vegetables and they ate
in her room. he located a small bottle of a liquor in her fridge and drank it.
she did not drink as she had taken the medication.
yc testified that after their meal, mr. zhang
lay down on the bed. as there was only a desk and a bed in the room, yc sat by
the desk. she testified mr. zhang tried to get her to lie on the bed with him.
he grabbed her from behind in what she demonstrated as a bear hug and held her
from standing to sitting on the bed to lying down on the bed.  she said “no”,
“stop” “what are you doing” and mr. zhang responded he was just hugging her.
over her clothes, he was rubbing his penis on her buttocks.
mr. zhang then tried to take off her top, her
pants, her underwear and undo her bra. he succeeded in undoing her bra but was
unsuccessful taking off her top. she could not remember if her pants came off,
but she knows her underwear were not removed. yc testified that mr. zhang
removed his own underwear, grabbed her hand, and tried to use it to masturbate his
erect penis for a few seconds as she tried to get away from him. he was rubbing
his hand and body on the outside of her vagina. she told him to stop touching
her.
mr. zhang rubbed yc’s vagina over her underwear
with his hand, and then put his hand under her underwear. she was “bleeding a
lot”. mr. zhang got blood on his hand. he then went to wash his hand. he put
his clothes on and left.
yc testified she had not consented to mr. zhang
touching her at all that day. she was offended. she described that they had
broken up, and he was the only person who was aware of her physical condition
at the time. she saw him as a family member and did not expect any physical touching.
mr. zhang testified to this encounter very
differently. he identified it to be exactly on may 1, 2022 as that was the day
they needed to complete the move from the rooming house address to the new
house rental.
mr. zhang agreed they had broken up, but he testified
he was the one who had initiated it after the mid-april event. he was precise
that he did it on april 20
th
, as they had argued on april 18
th
,
the day he signed the lease, and on april 19
th
. he took his
belongings and moved back to his parents’ home while yc was at work. he
testified that though yc kept pursuing him, for instance attending at his
workplace on april 27 unannounced and uninvited, waiting for him contrary to
his wishes.
he confirmed yc told him she was pregnant, and
they discussed an abortion. he testified he located a women’s care clinic, at
lawrence and dufferin and researched the process. he gave yc the contact
information for the clinic. she had a 10:30 a.m. appointment on may 1. yc
called him, and he went to her place that morning, leaving at 8:00 a.m. he stopped
at shopper’s drug mart and purchased a second pregnancy test, to make sure yc
was “truly” pregnant before they went to the clinic, and she was.
mr. zhang testified that he drove the two of
them to the clinic. they then went to the pharmacy and filled the prescription for
yc. it was a 2-pill procedure that would cause bleeding and yc would need his care.
he testified she took the medication, and they went to the rooming house first
to pick up boxes, then to the new vanda address. he remembered they had moved
items from greenbush on the last day of her lease there, april 30, and they had
to go back for more items on may 1, 2022, the day they visited the clinic.
at the vanda address, yc was not feeling well
and told him she had started bleeding. mr. zhang recalled he cooked ribs for yc,
as this is his best dish.  they chatted as they ate and watched a show. he drank
a small bottle of sake, but yc did not because of the medication.
mr. zhang testified they were lying on the bed
in the small room which only had a bed, a table and two chairs. yc began to cry
and talk about their disagreements. he tried to calm her and kissed her on the
forehead.
mr. zhang testified that yc rubbed his shoulder,
and his chest. she put one hand into his pants and pulled his pants down with
the other. he testified he did not want to do that. yc then masturbated him
until he ejaculated. he got up, got a tissue, and told her they should go no
farther, and she should rest. yc fell asleep and he then left at around 7:00
p.m. or so. he went back to his parents’ home.
when asked how he felt, he testified he was confused.
he had broken up with yc, but she was upset and crying, and he did not want to
make it worse. he thought she had misunderstood his kiss on her forehead.
count 3: sexual assault
a few days later, yc testified she had her 2
nd
follow up appointment at the clinic.  mr. zhang again attended with her. she
was unsure if it was that day when mr. zhang came to her home again to cook for
her.  he attended around the same time of day, and it was just the two of them
in the new address on vanda. she testified mr. zhang either ordered take-out or
brought food and they ate it together.
yc testified that after the meal mr. zhang laid down
on her bed. he told her that he was tired and yc said he looked sleepy. he said
he would take a nap and then would be ready to go.  he took her hand and pulled
her to the bed. she said “no”, that they had “broken up” and that he was only there
to take care of her “that is it.” she testified mr. zhang pulled her to the bed,
and she lay down beside him.  she tried to keep her distance from him, but he came
closer.
yc testified mr. zhang then tried to remove her
pants. “this time he did not put his hand inside” but rubbed his penis against
her and tried to masturbate himself that way. she did not recall if he took her
pants off, but she kept her adult disposable diaper on. he tried to remove it,
but she “stressed to him multiple times there is a lot of blood” and he never
removed the adult diaper.
yc testified mr. zhang grabbed her hand to
masturbate his exposed erect penis as he sat on her hips and vaginal area. he straddled
her with only one leg in his underwear as she lay face up on the bed. yc broke
her hand free. mr. zhang masturbated himself. after some time, mr. zhang
ejaculated on her belly. after doing so, he cleaned himself and handed her
tissues to clean herself.
they had a fight. yc told him that if this was
how he was going to take care of her, not to bother. mr. zhang then left.
mr. zhang’s testimony was that no sexual
activity occurred on this day at all. he testified yc called him because she
was to take the 2
nd
pill of the 2-pill abortion procedure and needed
his help.
it was may 4, 2022. as it was around 9:30 or 10:00
p.m. and too late to cook. mr. zhang ordered food delivered to the vanda
address. he arrived there before the food did. they ate it together and she
took the pill. yc asked him to unblock her from social media as she wanted to
contact him if she needed a follow up appointment with the clinic and needed
his help. he agreed to unblock her.
mr. zhang had a work shift the next day, and
after he put yc to bed, he left at about 11:00 p.m. and went to his family
home.
v.
analysis
counsel for mr. zhang submitted the court should
reject yc’s evidence because she was inconsistent and thus not credible nor
reliable. this is a persuasive submission.
counsel also submits the court should make adverse
findings because she delayed reporting the allegations to police
, had a motive to fabricate
and her demeanour
undermined her credibility. he
provided caselaw to support his position.
it is not in dispute these factors can be
relevant to a credibility and reliability assessment. however, i must instruct
myself to avoid stepping into myth and stereotype when taking these factors
into the consideration.
the defence theory is that yc was jealous, and
she was angry, and so she fabricated the sexual assault allegations to harm mr.
zhang.
however, a complainant can be both jealous and
angry and be telling the truth about a sexual assault. a complainant can also choose
to report a sexual assault because she is jealous and angry. neither jealousy
nor anger are inconsistent with having been sexually assaulted.  to conclude
otherwise without an evidentiary basis, is to assume that sexual assault
complainants, in this case, yc, cannot be simultaneously jealous, angry, and a
victim of sexual assault. she can.
counsel’s arguments and reasoning is also dangerously
close to the historical, and still persistent stereotypical argument, that jealous
and angry women lie about sexual assault, and that is what yc did.
i make no adverse findings against the
complainant based on when she reported the allegations to police. although there
is evidence of jealousy, and anger, i do not find them to be a motive for yc to
fabricate these allegations. finally, i instruct myself on the limited role of
demeanour in the assessment of credibility. culture, personality and pressure
can have an effect on behaviour during testimony, and a risk that stereotypes about
credibility may distort the evaluation of this behaviour is present.
i will focus my analysis on the substance of
the witness’ evidence, the internal consistency or inconsistency of their
narratives. i will accept some, none, or all their evidence, and make findings
of credibility and reliability in light of all the evidence.
reliability and credibility
yc was cross-examined in detail about her
characterization of her relationship with mr. zhang during the period of the sexual
assault allegations, her conduct, his conduct, and the sexual assault
allegations themselves.
counsel put whats app, instagram, and wechat
messages exchanged between yc and mr. zhang at the relevant times to yc to
challenge her testimony. i note that throughout this lengthy cross-examination,
counsel was polite and patient.
at least 3 notable inconsistencies, or
irregularities emerged during cross-examination that undermined yc’s
credibility. namely:
i.
who initiated the breakup of the relationship
and when.
ii.
the timing of the sexual assaults vis-à-vis yc’s
abortion medication process.
iii.
the reason yc testified she reported the
allegations to police.
the break-up
firstly, yc testified firmly that she broke up
with mr. zhang about mid-april 2022, after the first sexual assault, and before
she learned she was pregnant.  she was firm she did not want anything to do
with mr. zhang.
however, yc signed a lease with mr. zhang on
april 18, 2022 (exhibit 1), and continually engaged him in digital
conversations late into the night, and into the early morning hours as late
april 26, 2022 and before the second and third sexual assault allegations.  she
wrote things such as “
if
we are really going to break up, do you have to
treat me like an enemy?” (exhibit 3a) and “i just hope that one day in the
future,
we
can achieve the goal together” (exhibit 6b) (
emphasis
added). these conversations demonstrate yc is persistent in her pursuit of
connection with mr. zhang contrary to her testimony.
the whats app messages also demonstrate that it
is mr. zhang who repeatedly tries to end the relationship, end the
conversations, and wants to move on from the relationship but for caring for yc
during the abortion process when she needs it.
when confronted with the messages, yc testified that
she meant to be speaking in the 3
rd
person and that she was speaking
in general. however, given the number, content, and tone of her messages to mr.
zhang, i do not find her testimony on this point credible.
timing
yc testifies that the second and third sexual
assaults occur on the two days that she takes the two abortion inducing pills,
which makes her reliant on mr. zhang for care. these events also occur at the
same time as she moves into a new residence.
however, yc is unclear about the timing of any
of these events. she is unclear about the timing of the 2-pill abortion
process, particularly the timing between the taking of the two pills.  she is
unclear about the sexual assaults vis-à-vis when she took the pills. she is
unclear when she moved to the new address. she estimates that the second sexual
assault was around may 10, but that is 10 days after the may 1
st
move, and inconsistent with the timing evident in the messages she sends mr.
zhang about when she needs his help. even the messages she wrote, when put to
her, do not clarify or refresh her memory
in addition, yc testifies she did not want
anything to do with mr. zhang after she broke up with him, but for his help
with her care during the abortion process. however, the messages she sends him
are engaging and persistent, and demonstrate otherwise.
moreover, yc testified that if this is how he
would treat her after the third sexual assault, that he “need not bother
caring” for her, yet yc went on to testify she wanted and expected mr. zhang to
attend at 3
rd
follow up appointment which did not require she be
cared for at all.
to be clear, it is not that yc engaged with or
wanted to be with mr. zhang after the alleged sexual assaults, that undermines
her credibility. it is not that she may have had mixed feelings or was not definitive
about breaking up.  it is that yc was not candid about her feelings, her
conduct, and her communications, that undermines her credibility.
reason she reports to the police
finally, yc is inconsistent about her concern
for other women as the reason why she went to the police.
yc testified she did not want to report the
sexual assaults:
“as long as he fulfilled his obligations.
but i discovered that he was lying to me again and also, he’s also lying to other
girls, and i didn’t want these kind of things to happen again, and that is why
i went to the police.”
although yc testified she did not want “these
kinds of things”, ostensibly the sexual assaults she experienced “to happen
again” to “other girls”, her messages to mr. zhang and to the woman she
suspected was his lover contradict her in court evidence.
on the day yc expected mr. zhang to attend with
her to the medical appointment, yc testified she saw his social media profile
of him and another woman. yc messaged mr. zhang “fall in love so soon”, and
“you’d better announce it officially”. she called the woman mr. zhang’s
“lover”. she offered to be the “matchmaker” as she knew the woman via wechat.
yc contacted this woman and offered to be a “matchmaker”
between her and mr. zhang. yc confirmed she did not warn or express any concern
to this woman about mr. zhang’s conduct. this is in direct contradiction to her
expressed concern for other women’s well-being and the reason she goes to
police.
furthermore, yc was pedantic and deliberately
argumentative when she was cross-examined about the messages between her and
mr. zhang. she disagreed mr. zhang was being “sarcastic” in the messages and
then used that very word in her messages to him. she took issue with the use of
the word “lover”, but then used the word in the messages and in her testimony.
at times, she was evasive and challenged both counsel and the interpreter on
semantics, only to be shown to be inaccurate or inconsistent.
inconsistencies, irregularities, and lack of
clarity when testifying about incidents that occurred over a year or more before
need not be fatal to the reliability and credibility of a witness.  however, in
this case, in their totality, and how they relate to the material events, the
number and quality of these inconsistencies, irregularities, and lack of clarity
seriously undermine yc’s credibility and reliability.
the deficiencies in yc’s evidence were made more
stark by mr. zhang’s straight-forward, detailed, and candid testimony. his
evidence was clear as to what he did, when he did it, why he did it, and how he
did it. his evidence was specific and supported by the messages he exchanged
with yc. his explanations were cogent, coherent, and unshaken in
cross-examination.
sexual assault
#1
both yc and mr. zhang testified that in mid
april 2022, they had consensual vaginal intercourse with a condom and then continued
without a condom until mr. zhang ejaculated on yc.
yc testified mr. zhang did not get her consent
to vaginally penetrate her without a condom. mr. zhang testified he did obtain
her consent.
there were minor inconsistencies in yc’s
narrative as to whether she told mr. zhang to get a condom, or communicated the
same via body language, and whether she saw the condom on the floor first or
felt the ejaculate on her body first. these are peripheral matters.
however, a criminal trial is not a
credibility contest. a trial judge does not simply decide which version of
events to believe.
the credibility assessment is not an either/or process where the trial judge is
"required to choose a version of the events in order to reach a
verdict".
given yc’s compromised credibility, and mr.
zhang’s consistent and unshaken evidence on this count which raises a
reasonable doubt, i am not satisfied to the requisite degree required that mr.
zhang did not obtain yc’s consent.
sexual
assault #2
yc testified that the evening of her first abortion
treatment, when she was bleeding heavily, mr. zhang groped her, undid her bra,
and put his hands into her underwear while she protested. he only stopped when
he saw the blood on his hands.
mr. zhang testified that he kissed her on the
forehead while she was crying, and yc proceeded to touch him and then masturbate
him. he did not consent to this activity and felt confused. in effect, he was
sexually assaulted.
yc’s evidence was unclear as to when this sexual
assault happened and does not relate it to moving to the new address, however,
the lease, and her messages to mr. zhang suggest it is may 1
as she says
she will be busy and will have to move the next day.
as to the details, she testified mr. zhang was unable
to take her top off, but was able to both undo her bra, and remove it from
under her top. she could not recall if he removed her pants. though she
testified he tried to have her masturbate him, she did not recall if he had
clothes on, only to then testify that he removed his underwear.
yc testified that she felt mr. zhang was like a
family member at this point because they had broken up, but her messages to him
either the night before, or that night, are about their romantic relationship,
their future, and trying to convince him to perceive her in a better light than
he does.
it would appear unusual for mr. zhang to reach
into yc’s underwear knowing she would be bleeding profusely as he was informed
by his research and she told him, or that he would seem surprised he had blood
on his hands as yc testified.
similarly, it would appear unusual that yc would
feel motivated to masturbate mr. zhang since both yc and mr. zhang testified
that she was in significant physical discomfort because of the abortion
medication.
i am unable to determine what these two young
people did during this difficult evening, and what role sexual activity played
in their interaction.  though i am not prepared to accept the entirety of mr.
zhang’s evidence, however, in light of yc’s compromised reliability and
credibility on the significant details on the timing of this event, mr. zhang’s
straightforward evidence raises a reasonable doubt on this count.
sexual assault #3
on the day yc took the 2
nd
abortion
inducing pill, yc testified mr. zhang rubbed his penis against her and tried to
masturbate himself in that way while she told him several times not to. mr.
zhang grabbed yc’s hand to masturbate his exposed erect penis and when she took
her hand away, he masturbated himself and ejaculated on her belly.
mr. zhang testified no sexual activity occurred
at all.
yc is unclear as to when this event occurred, although
it is directly related to the 2-pill abortion treatment she was in the process
of.  she was unclear about when they attended the clinic together, she
testified mr. zhang came in the afternoon as before, but that appears
inconsistent with the appointment being earlier in the day the first time, and
it being moving day. in the small confines of the room, yc does not recall if
mr. zhang removed her pants or not. she testified she told mr. zhang she did
not want his help anymore, but then testified she was upset mr. zhang did not
attend the 3
rd
appointment in june, the day she learned he “lied” to
her when she saw his profile photo with a woman.
again, the challenges with the credibility and
reliability of yc’s evidence, both in its totality, and in regard to her
inconsistent evidence on her own conduct and intentions during this period, particularly
in contrast to mr. zhang’s detailed evidence, i am not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt the crown has proven this count.
vi.
conclusion
based on the evidence, my findings of
credibility and reliability, and the analytical framework of
w.(d.)
, i find
jun-feng zhang not guilty of all three counts of sexual assault.
released:  april
3, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria
r. v. zhang
,
2024 oncj 100
,
r. v. zhang
,
2024 oncj 617
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r. 320
at para.
39
.
r. v. seaboyer; r. v. gayme
,
1991 canlii 76 (scc)
, 2 scr 577 at para.
679-680
,
r. v. darrach
,
2000 scc 46
at para.
32-37
,
r. v. find
,
2001 scc 32
at para.
103
,
r. v. jl
,
2018 onca 756
at para.
46-47
,
r. v. jc
,
2021 onca 131
at para.
93-98
, and
r. v. jj
,
2022 scc 28
at para.
1
.
r. v. b (bw), no. 758 at
para. 28.
r. v. batte
(2000) canlii 5751
(oca) at para. 121.
r. v. w.(d.)
,
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
, 1 scr 742
r. v. d.d
., 200 scc 43 (canlii) at para. 65,
r. v. j.m
.
2018 onsc
344 (canlii)
at para.
67
,
r. v. roth
,
2020 bcca 240
at para.
134
,
r.
v. s.g.
,
2022 onca 727
at para.
43
r. v. batte
,
2000 canlii 5751 (on ca)
, at para
120
,
r. v. walters
,
2024 onsc 978
, at para.
7
r. v. l.s
,
2017 onca 685
at paras.
88 and 89
,
r. v. roth
, 2020
bcc 240 at para 130,
r. v. rose
,
2021 onca 408
at para.
22
,
r. v.
kruk
,
2024 scc 7
at para.
65
,
r. v. r.e.g
,
2024 onsc 6302
at paras.
158- 179
,
r. v. d.g
.
2024 onsc 2487
at para.
62
, 65, 66,
r. v. r.d
.
2016 onca 574
at para.
25
,
r. v. lennox
,
2019 onsc 5703
at para.
16
.
r. v. j.l
.,
2022 onca 271
at para.
6
r. v. y.(c.l.),
2008 scc 2
at para, 6.
r. v. w.(j.)
2014 onca 322
at para.
27
.