warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code
.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)   any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)   two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)   at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)   on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  offence
— (1)  every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. a.c.
, 2025 oncj
393
date:  july 22, 2025
ontario
court of justice
toronto
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and  —
a.c.
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
the crown
p.
rutherford
for
the defendant
r.
mohan
heard:
august 13, 2024 and june 4, 2025
sentencing
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction
on august 13, 2024, a.c. pleaded guilty to
two counts of sexual interference against his niece, k.j., contrary to
s. 151
of the
criminal code of canada
.
although a.c. pleaded to only two counts on
the seven-count information before the court, he admitted to further criminal
behaviour against k.j. and the parties agree that he is to be sentenced for the
entirety of the admitted criminal behaviour.
b.
the
circumstances of the offences
an agreed statement of fact was filed. it
sets out the following admissions.
a.c. is k.j.’s maternal uncle. k.j. has
known the accused for her entire life and would often attend his residence to
be babysat while her mother attended work. k.j. was born in 2008. a.c. was born
on december 9, 1966. at all material times, a.c. lived with his wife and did
not have any children.
the offences all took place between january
2015, and december 2020.
on the first occasion, k.j. remembers being
approximately seven years old. she was at a.c.’s house in the living room
taking a nap on the couch. she woke up to her underwear pulled down to her
knees and a.c. on top of her touching her vagina with his hands. he then put
his finger in her vagina for several seconds. when he stopped, he told her not
to tell anyone what he had done. she sustained soreness to her vagina.
on the second occasion, k.j. remembers being
approximately eight years old. she was at a.c.’s house for a family party. k.j.
and her cousin were in the guest room when a.c. entered and signalled k.j. to
come behind the bedroom door. she complied. he put his hand down her pants and
inserted his finger into her vagina for approximately 25 seconds.
on the third occasion, k.j. remembers being
approximately nine years old. she was sitting on the living room floor carpet
of a.c.’s house. he approached k.j. and laid her down on the floor. she was
wearing a dress at the time. he lifted her dress and touched her vagina. he
inserted his fingers into her vagina and rubbed her clitoris. he stopped when
he noticed her brother drive up the driveway in his car.
on the fourth occasion, she remembers being
approximately ten years old. she was on the living room couch in a.c.’s house
watching television. he approached her and sat next to her on the couch. he put
his hand up under her shirt and rubbed her breasts. he asked her to go to the
washroom and take a shower so that he could see her naked, but she refused.
on the fifth occasion, k.j. remembers being
approximately ten or eleven years old. she was sitting in the guest room of a.c.’s
house playing on her tablet. a.c. took off the covers that were on top of k.j. and
began touching her. he pulled her underwear down to her knees and inserted his
fingers into her vagina. he put his mouth on her vagina and inserted his tongue
for several seconds. he told her not to tell anyone what he had done to her.
on the sixth occasion, k.j. remembers being
approximately eleven years old. she was in the guest bedroom of a.c.’s house. he
came into the room and asked k.j. if he could touch her, to which she replied
“no”. the accused pried her legs apart with his hands and inserted one finger
into her vagina.
on the seventh occasion, k.j. was
approximately twelve years old. she was in the guest bedroom at a.c.’s house
when a.c. came in and complimented her. he kissed her on the forehead telling
her that she was beautiful. he kissed her on the mouth and inserted his tongue.
he pulled down k.j.’s leggings and inserted one of his fingers into her vagina.
she tried to squeeze her legs together to prevent him from touching her, but he
was stronger than she and he was able to pry her legs apart.
c.
the
impact of the offences on the victim and her family
three victim impact statements prepared by members
of k.j.’s immediate family were filed and read aloud by mr. rutherford at the
sentencing hearing.
a.c.’s abuse of k.j. has left a trail of
emotional, psychological, and social destruction for her and her entire family.
she is afraid of men, afraid of the dark and chronically sleep-deprived. she
has written suicide notes that her parents have discovered. the entire extended
family is fractured and k.j.’s parents feel tremendous guilt to the point of
sometimes feeling suicidal themselves.
the supreme court in
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
explains the immense and far-reaching harm typically caused
by the sexual exploitation of a child. i have no doubt that, even beyond what
is expressed in the victim impact statements, the defendant’s criminal
behaviour has had, and will continue to have the sort of impact described in
friesen
.
d.
the
circumstances of the offender
a.c. did not testify. nor did he choose to
say anything on his own behalf when given the opportunity at the sentencing
hearing.
what the court knows about a.c. comes from
counsel’s submissions and from what a.c. reported to dr. giovana de amorim
levin, a forensic psychiatrist who prepared a report for the defendant.
a.c. is now 58 years old, originally from
the philippines, having come to canada in 2001 after completing a civil
engineering degree in the philippines. he is now a canadian citizen. he has a
strong employment history, albeit not as an engineer. he has been married to
his first wife for 21 years and has no children.
he reports having had a happy childhood with
loving parents who worked as farmers.
he has the sort of infirmities one often
finds in men his age: hypertension, high cholesterol, and type 2 diabetes, but
he is relatively healthy. neither drug nor alcohol use pose a problem for him,
nor did they play a role in his offending behaviour.
it is clear from the offending behaviour and
what the defendant told dr. levin that he is a pedophile. yet, up to the date
of sentencing he has taken no steps to address his pedophilia – no counselling
or further medical assessment of any kind.
e.
the
positions of the parties
mr. mohan seeks a sentence of two years followed
by three years of probation and other ancillary orders.
mr. rutherford argues for a global sentence
of seven years and the same ancillary orders suggested by mr. mohan.
f.
the
principles of sentencing
the principles
of sentencing are set out in part xxiii of the
criminal code
.
according to
s.
718
of the
criminal code
, the "fundamental purpose" of
sentencing is to contribute to "respect for the law and the maintenance of
a just, peaceful and safe society" by imposing "just sanctions"
that have one or more of the following objectives, namely: (a) to denounce
unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender and others from committing
offences; (c) to separate offenders from society where necessary; (d) to assist
in rehabilitating offenders; (e) to provide reparations for harm done to
victims or the community; and (f) to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and the community.
further,
according to s. 718.1 of the code, the "fundamental principle" of
sentencing is that a sentence "must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender."
section 718.2 of
the code also dictates that, in imposing sentence, the court must also apply a
number of principles including the following:
•
a
sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating
or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender;
•
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
•
where
consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly
long or harsh;
•
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and,
•
all
available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the
circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention
to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
section 718.01 dictates that the objectives
of denunciation and deterrence are the primary considerations in sentencing offenders
who abuse children.
the overriding fundamental principle of
sentencing is proportionality. the sentence must be proportional to the gravity
of the offence and the offender's degree of responsibility. proportionality
"ensures a sentence reflects the gravity of the offence and is closely
tied to the objective of denunciation, promoting justice for victims and
ensuring public confidence in the justice system" while also ensuring
"that a sentence does not exceed what is appropriate, given the moral
blameworthiness of the offender, serving a limiting or restraining function,
ensuring justice for the offender. in our criminal justice system, a just
sanction is one that reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not
elevate one at the expense of the other"
r. v. ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
at
para
37
.
g.
the
aggravating circumstances
referring to s. 718.2, there are several
statutory aggravating factors in this case.
•
the defendant abused a member of his family.
•
the victim was under the age of eighteen years.
•
the defendant abused a position of trust.
•
the offence has had and continues to have a
significant impact on the victim.
this is not a single event. the defendant abused
his niece over an extended period.
the abuse included the use of physical force
to overcome resistance as well as “requests” that she not tell anyone. such a
“request” from a person in a position of trust and authority must have seemed
ominous and frightening to k.j.
h.
the
mitigating circumstances
mr. mohan says that a.c. is remorseful. a.c.
told dr. levin that if he were allowed to speak to k.j. he would apologize to
her. yet, he admitted to the doctor that he would not have stopped abusing k.j.
had he not been caught. he told the doctor that when he abused her, he was
under the impression that k.j. enjoyed the abuse and that he planned to ask her
to marry him when she turned 18.
whatever mitigation a.c.’s purported remorse
might merit, that mitigation is significantly undermined by his lack of
engagement with his pedophilia.
there is no evidence of any family or
community support for a.c.
i.
dr.
levin’s report
dr. levin applied two standard risk
assessment tools and opines that a.c. falls into the low-risk category for
recidivism. while the report is not without its procedural inaccuracies, i
accept dr. levin’s opinion in this regard.
j.
the
relevant precedents
it is a well settled principle of criminal
law that similar sentences should be imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences in similar circumstances.
criminal code
, s. 718.2 (b);
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para
2
.
there is a wealth of relevant jurisprudence
in ontario. the parties submitted several decided cases for my consideration. none
of the cases is entirely on point but taken together they help define a range
of sentence for the offences committed by a.c.
mr. mohan relies on the following cases:
r.
v. c.h
.,
2017 onsc 71
, and
r. v. b.n
.,
2024 oncj 687
.
mr. rutherford relies principally on the
following cases:
r. v. friesen
, supra
;
r. v. m.m.
,
2021 onca 890
;
r. v. n.k.
,
2024 onsc 2761
and
r. v. a.s.
,
2023 onsc 983
c.h.,
a pre-
friesen
judgment, involved an accused who was convicted by a jury of one count of
sexual interference, one count of sexual touching and one count of simple
assault. c.h. was 58 years old and had no record. he had, over the course of
two years, on a regular basis caused the son of his romantic partner to masturbate
c.h. while in the bathtub. c.h. was in poor health and had significant physical
and mental challenges and enjoyed solid and sustaining support from his family.
he received a sentence of two years.
b.n.,
a post-
friesen
judgment, involved findings of guilt for sexual assault, sexual touching and
invitation to sexual touching after a trial.
over the course of three consecutive days
b.n. once masturbated beside his granddaughter, repeatedly touched her vagina,
penetrating her digitally on at least one occasion and, on another occasion
directed her head toward his penis and inserted it in her mouth. he also
encouraged her to masturbate herself.
at the time of sentencing b.n. was 77 years
old and had no criminal record. he was infirm, and in cognitive decline. he was
living in an assisted living facility, used a walker, and had had an
emotionally destructive upbringing. b.n. was sentenced to two years followed by
three years of probation. march j. made it clear at para. 116 that he would
have sentenced b.n. more severely had he not been elderly and in failing
health.
in
m.m.
the court of appeal for
ontario in 2021 upheld a global seven-year sentence imposed on an offender by
renaud j. in the ontario court of justice.
m.m. had pleaded guilty to one count of
touching his niece, a person under the age of 16 for a sexual purpose and one
count of invitation to sexual touching. the trial judge concluded that m.m. inserted
at least one finger in the young complainant’s vagina on more than one occasion,
solicited fellatio and ejaculated on her.
m.m. was a first offender who was remorseful
and had sought counselling. the trial judge found that it was likely that the
defendant would “succeed in his rehabilitation”.
a.s
., decided
by cameron j. in 2023, involved a first offender convicted by a jury of five sexual
offences committed against a child when she was between six and 12 years of
age. the child considered a.s. as an uncle. the touching involved sucking on
her breasts and kissing and touching her vagina and buttocks over many years.
a.s. was sentenced to seven years in the penitentiary.
n. k.
, a 2023
decision of akhtar j. involved a 42-year-old man, treated as a first offender, convicted
by a jury of two counts of sexual assault, one count of sexual interference and
one count of invitation to sexual touching. the victim was his stepdaughter. the
abuse began when she was in grade three. the abuse included fondling of her
breasts, touching her vagina, using her hand to masturbate himself and finally
an unsuccessful attempt to insert his penis into her vagina. he also forced her
to watch pornography. n.k. was sentenced to seven years in the penitentiary.
k.
discussion
as the supreme court has made clear in
r.
v. friesen
,
supra,
at paragraph
114
, mid-single digit penitentiary
terms for sexual offences against children are the norm. upper-single digit and
double-digit penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare
or exceptional circumstances.
friesen
, at
paragraph
5
,
also dictates that prior precedents should be departed from
to increase sentences for those who abuse children.
there can be little doubt that the
sentencing principles of paramount consideration in cases of this kind are
deterrence, general and specific, and denunciation. for that reason, the fact
that a.c. presents a low risk of reoffending impacts my sentencing decision
only slightly.
considering the factors set out above, the
relevant precedents as well as the characteristics of the offence and the
offender, a.c., i see this as a case that lies at the more serious end of the
spectrum. a sentence of 6 years or 2,190 days on each count concurrent is
appropriate:
the parties agree that the following
ancillary orders should be made:
•
a primary dna order;
•
a s.161 (a-c) order for
20 years;
•
a s.109 order for 10
years;
•
a soira order for life.
released on july 22,
2025
justice russell
silverstein