ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. beites
, 2025 oncj 647
date:
2025 12 10
court
file no.:  sudbury 4011-998-23-40102993-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
kimberly-ann beites
before
justice g. jenner
mid-trial
request heard on december 4 and 9, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 10, 2025
m. wlodarczyk..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
s. von achten and d. rosso............................ legal
representatives for the defendant
jenner j.:
i.
introduction
on november 6, 2025, i found ms. beites guilty
of two counts of uttering threats:
2025 oncj 582
. sentencing was adjourned, at
her request, to january 26, 2026. she now seeks that a date be scheduled for an
application for a stay of the proceedings for unreasonable delay, pursuant to
ss. 11(b) and 24(1) of the
charter
. for the reasons that follow, i
decline to hear that application.
ii.
analysis
the duty to address
delay in a timely manner
in
r. v. j.f.
,
2022 scc 17
, the supreme
court of canada held that an accused person must raise the unreasonableness of
trial delay in a timely manner and generally must apply for a remedy before
their trial is held: para. 3. the court emphasized the following:
•
the framework in
r. v. jordan
,
2016 scc
27
, requires the accused, and indeed all parties, to be accountable and
proactive about delay: para. 31.
•
the defence may not benefit from its own
inaction or lateness in acting, and the accused is expected to use court time
efficiently: paras. 32-33.
•
an accused who sees delay lengthening must
respond proactively. as with any application, a s. 11(b) application must be
brought reasonably and expeditiously: para. 34.
•
lateness in bringing a s. 11(b) application is
contrary to the proper administration of justice, because it wastes judicial
resources: para. 34.
•
prompt applications put the crown and court on
notice such that they can take measures to mitigate delay and expedite
proceedings: para. 34.
•
generally, an accused who raises delay after
trial, and in particular after conviction, is not acting in a timely manner:
para. 35.
•
exceptionally, a s. 11(b) infringement will
reveal itself only once the trial has begun, but the accused must still act
proactively: para. 36.
the court of appeal for ontario recently applied
these principles in
r. v.
maclaughlin
,
2025
onca 686
,
upholding a trial judge’s determination not to adjourn
sentencing to permit a s. 11(b) application to be argued following a finding of
guilt. the court observed that the defence had not raised the delay issue
months earlier when it first became clear that the trial would not be completed
as originally scheduled. the court characterized the defence application as “a
last minute gambit designed to delay the prosecution of the case.” the court
held the trial judge was entitled to refuse the adjournment on the basis that
the accused did not comply with his “duty to act proactively”, citing
j.f.
:
see
mclaughlin
, at paras. 31-35.
i come to a similar conclusion in the present
case.
relevant
procedural history
evidence was heard in this trial over four days
(september 20, 2024; april 23, 2025; september 8, 2025; and october 23, 2025).
closing submissions were made on november 6, 2025. on september 8, 2025, the
defence advised that although a stay application was not initially contemplated,
a subsequent development relating to outstanding disclosure rendered such an
application “essential.” i set clear expectations: absent circumstances beyond
the accused’s control, all contemplated applications, including under s. 11(b),
were to be brought on the continuation date. the first hour of the return trial
date would be reserved for the s. 11(b) application.
the matter appeared before me again on september
17, 2025. this was merely a scheduling appearance to confirm a continuation
date of october 23, 2025.  at that time, i confirmed my expectation that the
first hour on that date would be devoted to hearing the contemplated s. 11(b)
application. the defence advised they remained hopeful they would have the
necessary transcripts compiled in time. i conveyed to the parties that i would
not delay the trial if the s. 11(b) application was not ready, and that if
counsel had been diligent but there was an issue with the s. 11(b) proceeding
that day, we would address that in due course.
on october 23, 2025, having not received any
notice of
charter
application, i inquired—repeatedly—whether defence
counsel intended to pursue any previously discussed applications, including for
a stay. counsel unequivocally indicated they were not bringing an application.
the trial proceeded, culminating in findings of guilt on november 6, 2025.
it was only after findings of guilt that, on
november 12, 2025, defence counsel advised of their intention to bring a s.
11(b) application. the crown requested a conference to address this issue.
on december 4, 2025, defence counsel and crown
counsel appeared before me. ms. beites was not present. both parties consented
to addressing issues of process in the absence of the accused pursuant to
s.
650(1.1)
of the
criminal code
. asked why the s. 11(b) application was
not brought at an earlier juncture, defence counsel advised that ms. beites “wanted
the acquittal” and “now must pursue a technical defence.” asked why the defence
did not communicate that conditional intention on october 23, 2025, defence
counsel advised it was because at that time the accused was still pursuing the
trial to secure an acquittal.
i indicated my concerns with hearing the
application in the circumstances, referred both counsel to the decisions in
j.f.
and
maclaughlin
, and, to comply with
s. 650
of the
criminal code
,
adjourned the matter for brief submissions with ms. beites present.  on december
9, 2025, in the presence of ms. beites, i heard those submissions.
applying
the duty to this case
i reject the defence submission that
j.f.
is distinguishable solely because it concerns a retrial. while
j.f.
addresses
some s. 11(b) issues specific to retrials, the principles cited above are not limited
to that context.
j.f.
is explicit about that, at para. 3, and indeed the
principles have been applied broadly, including in
maclaughlin
(see also
r. v. yizhak
,
2022 oncj 476
, at paras.
25-35
.
defence counsel asserts that the decision to
await a potential acquittal before bringing the s. 11(b) application reflects
an “absolute right” to determine the timing of such applications. no other
factor is advanced to explain the delay. this is not a case where, despite
diligence, some component of the application record was incomplete, nor is it a
case where new facts have recently arisen to extend the overall delay.
this is, rather, a case where the defence,
possessed of all the relevant information about delay in the matter, made a
tactical decision to await the outcome of trial before pursuing their
application. that approach, and the assertion of an “absolute right” to
determine timing, is completely inconsistent with the direction in
j.f.
the
tactical decision impeded the crown’s and court’s ability to mitigate further
delay. it engaged two further days of finite judicial and prosecutorial
resources for a trial that might, if the s. 11(b) application was meritorious,
have been unnecessary. those were resources which might have been reallocated
to other matters. the court provided ms. beites with the opportunity to argue the
delay issue that arose mid-trial. she declined. applying the principles in
j.f.
,
it would be contrary to the proper administration of justice to permit the
application to be pursued at this juncture.
iii.
conclusion
ms. beites has not complied with her duty to be
proactive and to bring her application in a timely manner. the court will not
hear her application. sentencing remains scheduled on january 26, 2026.
released:  december 10, 2025
signed:
justice g. jenner