ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. taylor
, 2025 oncj
651
date:  2025·12·05
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
daniel
taylor
judgment
evidence and submissions
heard: november, 19,21, 2025.
delivered: december
5, 2025
mr. robert dechellis .............................................................................   counsel
for the crown
mr. daniel taylor ............................................................................   self-represented
defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
a person working at a gas station called 911
to report that a driver of a red mercedes was unsteady on his feet and was
possibly impaired. officers intercepted the vehicle when it arrived at the owner’s
registered address. constable wilson spoke with the driver mr. taylor.  the
officer’s observations led him to make an approved screening device (asd)
demand. the failure of that test led to the arrest of mr. taylor and further
testing with an approved instrument (ai) at the station. those tests registered
truncated readings of 140 and 130mgs of alcohol per 100ml of blood. mr taylor
was charged with the offence known as “80+” – having a blood alcohol
concentration (bac) in excess of the legal limit (80mg/100ml) within two hours
of ceasing operation of a conveyance s 320.14(1)(b).
prior to arraignment, the crown alerted the
court that the evidence would show one
charter
breach in relation to the
approved instrument demand. that demand was not made “as soon as practicable”
as required by s 320.28(1). the crown also noted other aspects of the evidence
where the accused might wish to allege a s 10(b) breach. mr. taylor added two
further
charter
issues. both parties were content to proceed without
formal notice and response. the trial evidence and the submissions of both
parties identify the following issues for decision:
•
charter
s 9 –
arbitrary detention – was the stopping of the accused on the roadway near his
residence arbitrary?
•
charter
s 8 – asd
test – did the officer have a reasonable suspicion for the asd demand? was the
demand timely?
•
charter
s 10 –
did mr. taylor have the right to advice from counsel from the moment he was
stopped? was mr. taylor’s right to speak to counsel of choice breached?
•
charter
s 24(2) –
the approved instrument demand was not made “as soon as practicable” as
required by s 320.28(1). should the breath test evidence be excluded as a
remedy for that and any other breach?
•
80+ - if the breath test evidence is admitted,
does cell video evidence of possible vomiting prior to two breath tests leave a
doubt about the accuracy of the test results?
•
80+ - do tests taken more than two hours after
ceasing operation provide evidence of mr. taylor’s bac during that time period?
charter
s 9 – arbitrary detention
mr. taylor submits that the fact the police
blocked access to his driveway to stop his car was arbitrary as they had not
attended the gas station or conducted their own investigation.
driving is a regulated activity. police have
the authority under the provincial
highway traffic act
rso 1990 c h8 s
48
to stop drivers to investigate driver sobriety.  they also have that
power at common law –
r v orbanski,
2005 scc 37
. they don’t need a
reason to stop drivers for such an investigation, but they had one here. the
detailed 911 call provided a reasonable basis for the stop.
there was no s 9 breach.
charter
s 8 – asd test
i accept that the demand was made while p.c.
wilson was at the driver’s window although that interaction was not captured on
the in-car-camera (icc) audio. when the officer later prepared his notes, he recorded
the demand but did not put down the precise time as he couldn’t recall it and
he didn’t want to guess. he agreed at trial that he made the asd demand before
mr. taylor exited the car when the odour of alcohol became apparent.
constable wilson had the asd with him in his
vehicle. he did not need a reasonable suspicion to demand that mr. taylor
comply with an asd test (s 320.27(2)), but the evidence he had to that point
would also meet that criteria. his observations of slurring of speech and
fumbling with a document combined with the information he had received from the
911 call also provided a reasonable basis for a suspicion-based demand under s
320.27(1).
the demand was made at the driver’s window
within 2 minutes of the stop. the test sequence started 5 minutes later. it
took time for the officer to retrieve the asd from his vehicle. the test was
also delayed as the accused had called his parents who came outside and
intervened in the investigation. the icc video showed mr. taylor and his
parents argued with another officer at 3:00 a.m. eventually mr. taylor came
back to the front of the police vehicle where the asd was waiting on the hood.
it took 5 minutes for mr. taylor to provide
a suitable sample. the officer demonstrated the device twice and each time the
video showed it took 3 seconds for constable wilson to provide a sufficient
sample. mr. taylor at first provided no air into the device resulting in no
tone as explained by the officer. then there were stop and start samples until
he provided a suitable sample on the 8
th
attempt.
the crown has proved that the screening
device demand was lawful. there is nothing about the administration of the test
that was unreasonable or unfair. there is no evidence of a s 8 breach in
relation to the asd test.
charter s 8 – the approved
instrument demand
p.c. wilson explained that the asd fail
result showed that the accused’s bac was 100mg/100ml or higher and that
provided grounds for an approved instrument demand.
constable wilson did not read the approved
instrument demand at the roadside. reading anything was difficult. during the
right to counsel advice mr. taylor interrupted constantly shouting “hellooooo”
and other words in a loud and argumentative voice. he pretended he could not
hear the officer, even when the officer opened the back door of the car and
started to read the advice again. mr. taylor obstructed the officer’s effort to
provide that advice. the extended sequence appears to have distracted the
officer from the next step which would have been the demand. the crown concedes
that the officer was still required to at least try to read the ai demand.
there was a demand made at the station, but
it came after a long wait for a lawyer to return a call. while the crown has
proved the demand was based on reasonable grounds, the crown concedes that the
demand by the breath technician was not made “as soon as practicable”.
the failure to make the approved instrument
demand “as soon as practicable” as required by s 320.28(1)(a) results in a
breach of s 8 of the
charter.
charter s 10 – right to counsel
mr. taylor submitted that he should have
been informed of his right to speak with a lawyer from the moment he was
detained. he further submitted his right to speak with a lawyer of his choice
was breached.
mr. taylor is right that section 10 of the
charter
is engaged on arrest
or detention.
however, there is a long-standing
exception for the roadside investigation of licensed drivers to determine their
sobriety. those investigations including asd testing are brief and incompatible
with a delay to consult with counsel. the limitation on the right to counsel in
this context has been held to be reasonable –
r v orbanski
,
2005 scc 37
at para
52
.
p.c. wilson attempted to provide right to
counsel advice immediately upon arrest, but mr. taylor was very argumentative
and loudly resisted that effort. constable wilson patiently continued his
effort. eventually mr. taylor said that he wanted to speak with a lawyer named
“mystensky”. during booking at the station mr. taylor was still angry and
argumentative, but the officers were able to clarify that the lawyer mr. taylor
wished to speak with was actually boris bytensky, a well-known criminal defence
lawyer in toronto.
constable wilson called mr. bytensky’s
office at 3:57 a.m.  that number referred the officer to an emergency line. he
called the emergency line and spoke with an operator who advised she would page
mr. bytensky. by 4:30 a.m. mr. bytensky had not called back. there was no call
from his office that morning.
constable wilson spoke with mr. taylor and
said it was early sunday morning and the chance of the lawyer calling back “was
not very promising”. he asked mr. taylor if he wished to call another lawyer or
call duty counsel. mr. taylor continued to ask for mr. bytensky. mr. taylor
continued to be obstructive during this conversation, repeatedly saying he
didn’t understand the simple question posed by the officer. p.c. wilson continued
to be patient, repeating the two further options six times. mr. taylor refused
to make another choice so eventually at 5:00 a.m. he was handed over to the
qualified technician.
mr. taylor told the qualified technician
p.c. poole that he wished to speak with a lawyer named jenna imbrogno. p.c.
poole looked up that name on the ontario law society website and did not find a
registered lawyer with that name. mr. taylor insisted she was a lawyer, and he
provided a number. the officer called that number, but nobody picked up. p.c.
poole didn’t recall if there was a voicemail option, but he always leaves a
message where that is possible. that’s likely here given there was another
wait. there was no return call. mr. taylor did not suggest another lawyer, nor
did he ask to speak to duty counsel. at 5:30 a.m. he was taken to the breath
test room and tests were conducted.
mr. taylor had a right to speak with a
lawyer. when it became plain that his lawyer of choice was not available, he
needed to act with diligence and consider other options. the officer was not
wrong to call the second name as that person’s status could have been clarified
at the time of the call if they were available. however, when that person did
not call back mr. taylor needed to consider the other options they had
discussed – the immediate availability of duty counsel or speaking with another
lawyer. he did not exercise his right with reasonable diligence.
no further warning in relation to the right
to speak with counsel was required as the police had called counsel of choice
and a second possible lawyer. they had also suggested two other options. they
had been very patient at the roadside and at the station with mr. taylor’s
aggressive obstruction of their efforts to advise and assist him with his right
to legal advice. the officers reasonably waited an hour and a half, but there
was never a return call from either person. mr. taylor wanted to speak only to the
two people he named, and he refused multiple offers to call duty counsel or
another lawyer. the officers were entitled to proceed with the testing. the
evidence is plain that had he changed his mind at any point and requested duty
counsel or another lawyer the officers would have immediately placed that call.
there was no s 10(b) breach.
section 24(2)
the section 8 breach is a failure to comply
with the time limit for the demand imposed by s 320.28(1) – “as soon as
practicable”.
in this case the breach wasn’t serious given
that it arose in large part from the conduct of the accused. constable wilson
was professional and patient, but mr. taylor would not let him complete the
right to counsel advice. the time spent trying to provide that advice and the
difficulties with mr. taylor plainly distracted the officer from continuing
with the breath demand. the officer had a duty to make or attempt to make a
timely demand, but i find his failure to do so here was the product of unusual
circumstances and not of any disregard for legal or
charter
standards
the failure to make a timely demand had no
apparent impact on the
charter
protected interests of mr. taylor. he
would have shouted down any reading of a demand. he was argumentative on
booking as well, continuing to shout down any advice and instructions given by
both officers. the delay in the qualified technician’s demand at the station
after receiving grounds was due to an extended wait for counsel(s) of choice to
call back. mr. taylor was told during the right to counsel conversations that
breath testing was the next step.
the asd test fail result provided reasonable
grounds for the approved instrument demand. the failure to read that demand in
a timely way was a breach, but one which was explained by the unusual
circumstances at the roadside and at booking. it would bring the administration
of justice into disrepute to exclude reliable breath test evidence to remedy a
technical breach caused in large part by the accused’s own conduct.
80+ - mouth alcohol
mr. taylor submits that the cell video
evidence shows he vomited before each of the approved instrument tests. he did
not bring that to the attention of the breath technician. the qualified
technician agreed in cross-examination that mouth alcohol arising from vomiting
or other source can affect the accuracy of the readings. the defendant submits
that there must be a reasonable doubt about the reliability of the test results.
there are two issues with this submission, a
factual one and a legal one.  the factual issue is that the evidence at trial
did not support the submission. the legal issue is that the
criminal code
no
longer permits this type of evidence being considered as “evidence to the
contrary” or “evidence tending to show” that could leave a reasonable doubt
about the accuracy of the test results.
the cell video did not support mr. taylor’s
submission that he vomited before the first test. he certainly was drinking
water at the sink, but the qualified technician testified that wouldn’t
interfere with the test. it’s possible he vomited prior to providing the second
sample, but the cell toilet area was blacked out on the video for privacy. if
he did vomit then, p.c. poole’s evidence showed that it would not have affected
the tests as it was 19 minutes before the second test. the waiting period for
mouth alcohol is 15 minutes which is also the time between tests required by
the
criminal code
for the same reason. both samples were found by the
qualified technician to be suitable using four factors which did not show the
presence of mouth alcohol. the two test results were in good agreement,
confirming that mouth alcohol did not skew the result of the second test.
prior to 2018 it was open to a defendant to
call “evidence tending to show” that the approved instrument was malfunctioning
or operated improperly and that his breath test results would not have
otherwise exceeded that statutory limit. prior to 2008 the defendant could call
“evidence to the contrary” to raise a doubt about the accuracy of the readings.
in 2018 parliament revised the drinking and
driving provisions of the
criminal code
.
parliament recognized that the detailed
breath test protocol set out by the
alcohol test committee
ensured the
accuracy of the breath test results in every case. that protocol was already
part of the software of every instrument approved by the
test committee,
but
parliament codified the essential steps of the breath test procedure in s
320.31. that section set out the required test steps including two independent
calibration checks against a certified, known standard during the test
sequence, a 15-minute wait between two tests to guard against mouth alcohol,
and a further requirement that the results of the two tests be in good
agreement as a further way to ensure that there was no mouth alcohol or other
issue which affected the results. where the crown proves that the tests followed
those requirements, that section provides that the test results are
conclusive
proof
of the person’s bac at the time the tests were taken. the term
“conclusive proof” specifically disengages the provision of the
interpretation
act,
rsc 1985, c i-21
s 25(1) that provides for “evidence to the
contrary”.
a challenge to the accuracy of the approved
instrument test results must now focus on one of the criteria set out in s
320.31(1). in this case the crown has proved that each condition required by
that section has been met:
•
samples were received into an approved
instrument (ai);
•
the ai was operated by a qualified technician;
•
before each sample was taken the qualified
technician conducted a system blank test with a result not more than
10mgs/100ml and a system calibration check the result of which was within 10%
of the target value of an alcohol standard certified by an analyst;
•
there was an interval of at least 15 minutes
between tests; and
•
the results of the analyses, rounded down to the
nearest 10mg, did not differ by more than 20mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood.
section 320.31 therefore deems the test
results in this case “conclusive proof” of mr. taylor’s blood alcohol
concentration at the time of testing. the questions mr. taylor raised in
relation to the cell videos were not supported by the evidence and they could
not otherwise leave a doubt about the readings as a matter of law.
80+ – tests outside 2 hours
the breath tests were taken more than two
hours after mr. taylor stopped driving. in the absence of expert evidence, mr
taylor questions how the later test results can be applied to the two-hour
window in which the offence is alleged to have occurred?
it’s common experience that the human body
eliminates alcohol over time. forensic toxicologists routinely testify that
there is a scientific consensus that alcohol is unusual in that all persons
eliminate that drug at a standard rate within a narrow range. that property
allows toxicologists to extrapolate backwards in time from known blood alcohol
concentrations (bac) to reliably state a person’s bac at a prior time. mr.
taylor is right that generally such evidence would require expert testimony.
in 2018 parliament enacted
section 320.31(4)
of the
criminal code
which eliminated the need to call a toxicologist
for routine “read back” evidence. that section provides that where the samples
of breath were taken more than two hours after the person ceased to operate the
conveyance, the person’s blood alcohol concentration within those two hours is
conclusively presumed to be the concentration established in the tests, plus an
additional 5mg/100ml for every interval of 30 minutes in excess of those two hours.
parliament applied the standard range of
alcohol elimination and took a conservative value most favourable to the
accused to relate breath test results back to the relevant time period.
where samples of breath were taken more than
two hours after the person ceased to operate the conveyance, the person’s blood
alcohol concentration within those two hours is conclusively presumed to be the
concentration established in the tests, plus an additional 5mg/100ml for every
interval of 30 minutes in excess of those two hours.
because mr. taylor was metabolizing and
eliminating alcohol from the time he was stopped by police to the time of his
approved instrument tests, his blood alcohol concentration during the two hours
after he was stopped would have been higher than the later breath test readings
which were rounded down to 130mgs. the stop was shortly after 2:55 a.m. the
second test was completed at 6:07 a.m. for every half hour after 4:55 a.m.
section 320.31(4)
adds another 5mgs to the accused’s bac. there are two half
hour periods after 4:55 a.m. to the end of the second test so the crown has
proved that mr. taylor’s blood alcohol concentration within two hours of
ceasing to operate his conveyance was 130mgs + 10 mgs = 140mgs/100ml.
conclusion
i found that the approved instrument demand
was not made as soon as practicable contrary to s 320.28(1) resulting in a
breach of mr. taylor’s s 8
charter
right to be free from searches unless
authorized by law and conducted in accordance with that law. i have found that
the breach could not reasonably result in exclusion of the breath test evidence
under s 24(2) or any other remedy. the remaining
charter
applications
were dismissed.
considering the evidence as a whole, i find
the crown has proved the charge alleged beyond a reasonable doubt. there will
be a finding of guilt.
delivered: december 5, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel