ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. ahmad
, 2025 oncj 620
date:
2025 11 26
court
file no.:  central west (peel) region
998-24-31110576-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
shahzad ahmad
before
justice r. tomovski
heard
on november 5, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on november 26, 2025
andres de avila.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
david holmes…………………………………counsel for the
accused shahzad ahmad
tomovski j.:
introduction
mr. ahmad, now 47 years old, has lived a law-abiding
life except for the single day on which he assaulted his daughter, who was between
12 and 13 years old at the time.  the assault was approximately eight to nine
years ago.
i have considered the submissions of the crown
and the defence, the applicable sentencing principles, and the circumstances of
the offence and the offender including the aggravating and mitigating factors.
after having done so, i find that any sentence short of a jail sentence would not
be a reasonable and fit one in the circumstances.  my reasons below explain my
finding.
position of the parties
the crown and defence have markedly different
sentencing positions. the former is suggesting a jail sentence; the latter asks
the court to impose a conditional discharge.  each party has identified factors
supporting their respective recommendations.
the crown is seeking a jail sentence of 30 days,
followed by a period of probation.  he submits that a jail sentence is
necessary to address the primary sentencing principles in this case of
denunciation and deterrence and to address several applicable statutory
aggravating factors including that the victim was under 18 years at the time of
the offence and that mr. ahmad abused a position of trust as the victim’s
father.
conversely, the defence is seeking a conditional
discharge along with a period of probation.  he submits that a discharge would
not be contrary to the public interest due to there being several mitigating
factors including that mr. ahmad does not have a criminal record and has been
law-abiding since the assault especially as it relates to his daughter including
compliance with his release terms relating to her.  the defence emphasizes that
a period of probation could ensure ongoing monitoring with court-imposed terms.
the defence also identifies collateral consequences arising from any conviction
including potential loss of employment and family separation.
applicable sentencing principles
section 718
of the
criminal code
provides
that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives: denunciation; deterrence; rehabilitation; to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders; separating offenders from society; reparations for
harm done to victims or the community; and acknowledging the harm done to
others.
section 718.1 requires as the fundamental
principle of sentencing that a sentence is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
sections 718.2(d) states that “an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances”.  section 718.2(e) states that “all available
sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances
and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be
considered for all offenders[.]”
section 718.01 identifies denunciation and
deterrence as the primary sentencing objectives when imposing a sentence for an
offence involving the abuse of a person under 18 years old.
circumstances of the offence
the crown proceeded summarily.  mr. ahmad’s
trial took place over the course of 4 days, on september 22 to 25, 2025, after
which, on october 1, 2025, i found him guilty of one count of assaulting his
daughter.
the assault occurred in the family home between
2016 and 2017 when mr. ahmad’s daughter tried to intervene in an argument
between her father and her mother, while coming to the aid of the latter.  mr.
ahmad’s daughter was between 12 and 13 years old.  i found mr. ahmad slapped
his daughter’s face and back and grabbed her by the arm and dragged her
upstairs.  he then threw her into her bedroom.  the assault caused redness to
the left side of the victim’s face, fingerprint marks to her left forearm, and
redness and soreness to the middle of her back.
circumstances of the offender
mr. ahmad is 47 years old.  he was born in
pakistan where he finished high school and college.  in 1999, he and the
victim’s mother married. the following year, mr. ahmad was sponsored by his
wife and arrived in canada.  he has since become a canadian citizen.
mr. ahmad and his wife met while studying
medicine at university.  due to the cost of qualifying in canada, mr. ahmad
abandoned his pursuit of becoming a doctor and sought employment to support his
family.  he has remained gainfully employed ever since then, working various
jobs including as a labourer, salesperson and manager.  mr. ahmad currently
works as a senior sales manager at a car dealership and is required to be
licenced by the industry regulator.  i am advised by the defence that a requirement
of the regulator is that mr. ahmad must disclose any findings of guilt, which
may result in revocation of his licence.
around the time mr. ahmad was charged, the
victim and her mother had already moved out of the family residence.  mr. ahmad
and his two sons remained and have lived together ever since.  his sons are 18
and 15 years old and are dependent on their father including financially.
at the time of the offence, mr. ahmad and his
wife were experiencing marital difficulties which, i am advised, put a lot of
stress on mr. ahmad.  further, he was working very long hours over six days a
week.
i was provided several letters of support from
mr. ahmad’s friends.  they all speak to mr. ahmad’s strong work ethic and
integrity and positive contributions to his community.  they also speak about
mr. ahmad’s love and support for his sons.
to summarize, both prior to and after the
assault, mr. ahmad has, otherwise, been a completely law-abiding member of the
community.  he is educated, hardworking, gainfully employed and has always
financially supported his family including, now, his two dependent sons, with
whom he resides.
aggravating and mitigating
factors
there are several aggravating factors in this
case including statutory aggravating ones.
section 718.2(a)(ii) treats as aggravating an
offence that is committed against a member of the offender’s family.  in this
case, mr. ahmad assaulted his daughter.
as referenced above, s. 718.2(a)(ii.1) treats as
aggravating an offence committed against a victim who is under 18 years old.
mr. ahmad’s daughter was between 12 and 13 years old at the time of the
assault.
section 718.2(a)(iii) treats as aggravating an
offence committed while the offender is in a position of trust or authority in
relation to the victim.  the father-daughter relationship in this case is one
such relationship.
the assault committed by mr. ahmad was a deliberate
and serious act of violence, involving multiple applications of force, committed
in the family home, which resulted in multiples injuries to his daughter.  a
family home is a setting where a child is entitled to feel safe and protected and
free from violence, especially from one’s parent: see
r. v. friesen
,
2020
scc 9
at para.
178
(although
friesen
involved a sexual offence committed
in the home, the principle, in my view, has similar application to a non-sexual
offence committed in the home).
section 718.2(a)(iii.1) treats as aggravating an
offence that has had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances.  the victim was a child at the time, between
12 and 13 years old.  the assault had a profound and enduring impact on her, as
evidenced by her victim impact statement, which was made exhibit 1 on sentence.
the victim pointedly explains the trauma the assault caused her.  she describes
being “robbed [by her father of her] self esteem, happiness, comfort and safety
as a child”.  her words show a great level of maturity and insight reflecting
on what was undoubtedly a terrifying and life-changing experience.
there are several mitigating factors in this
case.
the offence appears to be entirely out of
character and was not pre-meditated.
mr. ahmad has no prior criminal record.
he has been gainfully employed for nearly his
entire adult life.  he currently works six days a week.  he is the sole
financial provider for his two sons.
mr. ahmad’s two sons are dependent on their
father.  they live together with their father and rely on him financially and
for housing.  caring and providing for his sons shows good character and
increases mr. ahmad’s prospects for rehabilitation.  incarceration, no matter
how brief, would directly impact mr. ahmad’s sons.  family separation is a
mitigating factor and a meaningful collateral consequence that may impact the
sentence imposed even when denunciation and deterrence are required: see
r.
v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
at paras.
45-47
.
mr. ahmad has strong support in the community as
referenced in the letters of support from his friends.
mr. ahmad has strictly adhered to the terms of
his release order for a period of 14 months, including abstaining from having
any contact with his daughter.  this also suggests mr. ahmad has good prospects
for rehabilitation and is a low risk to reoffend.
range of sentence & recommended
cases
no sentence is legally precluded for a summary
conviction for assault.
the defence seeks a conditional discharge and a
period of probation.  a discharge may be imposed if it is in the best interests
of the accused and not contrary to the public interest:
s. 730(1)
of the
criminal
code
.
the crown seeks a 30-day jail sentence and a
period of probation.  incarceration for a period of 90 days or less permits an
offender to serve the sentence intermittently: s. 732(1).  in its submissions,
the crown indicated he was not opposed to mr. ahmad serving his sentence
intermittently to allow mr. ahmad a greater chance at keeping his current
employment.
pursuant to s. 742.1, a conditional sentence is
available if the statutory prerequisites are met: the sentence of imprisonment
is less than two years; there is no minimum term of imprisonment; and serving
the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community
and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of
sentencing set out in
s. 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
.  no class of
offence is excluded from consideration for a conditional sentence: see
r v
walker
,
2025 abca 29
at para.
16
.
the crown has provided me with several cases which
he submits are similar and, therefore, useful in arriving at the appropriate
sentence for mr. ahmad.  i summarize the cases below.
in
r. v. ciobanu
,
2025 oncj 92
, mr.
ciobanu was convicted after trial of slapping his child in the face and kicking
him in the testicles after the child tried to intervene on behalf of his mother
on two separate occasions.  mr. ciobanu struck his son without any
justification while the latter was simply trying to protect his mother.  he was
sentenced to 30 days jail on each assault.  jones j. at para. 45 found that a
conditional sentence was not appropriate as “it would not adequately reflect
mr. ciobanu’s degree of personal responsibility, the harm done to his wife and
child, and the values represented in the
criminal code
regarding
violence against woman and children more generally”.  further, jones j. at para.
41 noted that “[j]ail sentences are typical, even for single acts of abuse.
conditional sentences have been imposed only in cases where significant
mitigating factors were present”.  finally, at paras. 46 and 47, jones j. found
that a potential collateral consequence that may see mr. ciobanu lose his
employment did not justify the reduction of an otherwise fit jail sentence
especially when the offence involved personal violence.
in
r. v. r.m
,
2022 onsc 6662
, r.m. was
convicted by a jury of several offences including assaulting his son and a
young boy for which he was sentenced to 30 days jail for each assault.  the
assaults consisted of grabbing their arms while trying to abduct his son: at
paras. 1, 5-6.  although r.m. had a prior unrelated conviction, the trial judge
sentenced him as a first-time offender: at para. 14.  a discharge was held to
be contrary to the public interest based on r.m.’s actions and callous
disregard for the rule of law: at para. 39.  the 30-day jail sentences were not
appealed:
r. v. r.m
.
,
2023 onca 853
at paras.
14-15
, 37.
in justice speyer’s decision of
r. v. ossetchkine
,
an unreported decision of the superior court of justice dated october 18, 2019,
mr. ossetchkine was convicted by a jury of assaulting his wife and three
children in the family home over multiple years and sentenced to 30 days jail
for each (simple) assault: at pp. 4-7, 10, 17.  some of the assaults consisted
of mr. ossetchkine hitting his children with his hand on their buttock, back
and thighs, in what was described as a “corrective” approach to discipline.  the
trial judge held that a conditional sentence was inappropriate in the
circumstances to address the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing, especially
based on the absence of several mitigating factors and the presence of several
aggravating factors: at pp. 13-14.  mr.
ossetchkine’s
sentence appeal was
dismissed:
r. v. ossetchkine
,
2021 onca 698
at paras.
3
, 10.
the defence has asked me to consider two cases,
and the cases cited therein.  they are summarized below.
in
r. v. m.m.
,
2020 oncj 635
, m.m. was
convicted of assaulting her 3-year-old child by hitting the child multiple
times on the buttock out of frustration, tiredness and anger, causing bruising,
and grabbing the child’s face and screaming at him for not going to sleep.  the
judge granted m.m. a conditional discharge on the basis that there were several
mitigating factors that made the imposition of a discharge appropriate.  those
factors are a guilty plea; a youthful first-offender, an expression of genuine
remorse and acceptance of responsibility; and the completion of upfront counselling
and programming to address underlying mental health concerns and anger
management issues.
in
r. v. espina
,
2020, onsc 6342
, mr.
espina was convicted of assaulting his child by hitting the child multiple
times on his shins with a belt and on his buttock and palms with a broomstick.
the summary conviction appeal judge found that the sentencing judge had erred
in rejecting a joint submission for an absolute discharge, which was ultimately
imposed on appeal.  several mitigating factors made the imposition of a
discharge appropriate.  those factors are an early guilty plea; a joint submission;
an expression of remorse; and significant post-charge rehabilitative efforts
including the completion of counselling.
the mitigating factors present in cases like
m.m.
and
espina
– a guilty plea, remorse, acceptance of responsibility and
rehabilitative efforts – that justified the imposition of a discharge are
absent here.  further, both
m.m.
and
espina
, and all the cases
cited therein, involved parents who were misguided in disciplining their children.
mr. ahmad’s assault of his daughter, however, was not inflicted from a genuine attempt
to discipline.  rather, it was a deliberate act of violence to prevent his
daughter from intervening in a spousal dispute and to punish her for having tried.
application to mr. ahmad’s case
as referenced, there are several mitigating
factors in this case.  mr. ahmad has no prior criminal record.  he is gainfully
employed.  he has strong support in the community.
a criminal conviction and record may result in
mr. ahmad losing his licencing and therefore his current employment.  it is a
relevant collateral consequence.  family separation is also a relevant
collateral consequence.  any period of incarceration, even a brief one, would
result in a separation between mr. ahmad and his two dependent sons.  the
latter rely on mr. ahmad for shelter and financially.
however, as also referenced, there are several
aggravating factors.  the victim was under 18 years old.  the assault was a
breach of trust.  the assault occurred in the family home and resulted in
multiple injuries.  the offence has continued to negatively impact the victim.
generally, a discharge is not common in cases of
assault by a parent against their child in which remorse and acceptance of
responsibility are not present, which usually, but not always, accompany a
guilty plea.  two reasons are that genuine remorse and acceptance of
responsibility lead to an inference that specific deterrence has been
addressed, or is at least less of a concern, and that prospects for
rehabilitation are good, which cannot be assumed simply by the passage of time
from the offending conduct.
mr. ahmad has not shown any remorse or
acceptance of responsibility.  i do not treat the lack of remorse as an
aggravating factor.  instead, it is simply the absence of a mitigating factor:
see
r. v. shah
,
2017 onca 872
at para.
8
.  the absence of remorse
impacts specific deterrence and rehabilitation as it may suggest a lack of
insight into the offending conduct and a failure to accept responsibility.  i,
similarly, treat the absence of a guilty plea as the absence of a mitigating
factor, not as an aggravating factor.
the letters of support filed on mr. ahmad’s
behalf, which speak to his good character generally, are relevant to specific
deterrence and rehabilitation.  although the letters of support offer insight
into mr. ahmad’s character generally, they do not specifically address his
relationship with his daughter.  it is unclear whether some or all the authors
were aware of the findings made against mr. ahmad.  further, i am required to
put the friends’ views of mr. ahmad’s general character into context since
offences like the one mr. ahmad was convicted occur in private and out of
public view and knowledge: see
r v. sheppard,
2025 scc 29
at para.
97
(although
sheppard
involved a sexual offence, the principle, in my view, has similar application
to a non-sexual offence).  as such, i give the letters less weight.
i find a discharge is not appropriate in this
case and would be contrary to the public interest.  the offence is a serious
assault committed in the family home by a father against his child which
resulted in multiple injuries.  further, the assault was committed to prevent a
child from intervening in a spousal dispute and to punish the child for having
tried.  the offence has had a significant, ongoing impact on the victim.
denunciation and deterrence are paramount principles in this case which would
not be adequately addressed by a discharge.  there is an absence of significant
mitigating factors including remorse and acceptance of responsibility.
instead, i find a jail sentence is necessary to
address the primary sentencing principles in this case of denunciation and
deterrence.  it would also address mr. ahmad’s high degree of responsibility
and the seriousness of the assault, committed against his child in the family
home, and the physical, psychological and emotional harm the assault caused his
daughter.
i am not persuaded that the mitigating factors
in this case and the potential collateral consequences of mr. ahmad losing his
licencing and employment and being briefly separated from his adult sons justify
the reduction of an otherwise fit jail sentence especially when the assault
involved his child and a deliberate infliction of violence against her.  whereas,
the absence of several important mitigating factors, like remorse, acceptance
of responsibility and insight, and the presence of several aggravating factors,
including statutory ones, make a conditional sentence inappropriate in this
case.  a conditional sentence would not adequately reflect mr. ahmad’s degree
of responsibility and the harm done to his daughter.  put differently, serving
the sentence in the community would be inconsistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
s. 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal
code
.
sentence imposed
i impose a sentence of 30 days jail.
the sentence will be served intermittently.  i
am satisfied that allowing mr. ahmad to serve his sentence on weekends will
result in a shorter period of separation from his sons each week and the
ability to maintain his current work schedule until a final decision is made
about his licencing.
mr. ahmad will be taken into custody today for
processing and then released.  he will then surrender himself into custody at
the jail this saturday, november 29, 2025, at 10:00 p.m. and be released on
monday, december 1, 2025, at 6:00 a.m.  mr. ahmad will serve his sentence on
consecutive weekends in this manner going forward until his sentence is
completed.
mr. ahmad must appear at the jail to serve his
intermittent sentence on time, in a sober condition, with a blood alcohol
concentration of zero, and not under the influence of or in possession of any
controlled substance unless he is taking that controlled substance pursuant to
a lawfully obtained prescription.
mr. ahmad will comply with the terms of a
probation order while not in custody during the period the sentence is being
served.  the terms are:
i.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour
ii.
not to contact or communicate, in any way,
either directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means with liba
ahmad or bazga abdullah
iii.
not to attend within 50 metres of the place
where you know liba ahmad or bazga abdullah to live, work, go to school,
frequent or any other place you know them to be
pursuant to s. 743.21(1), an order will issue
prohibiting mr. ahmad from communicating, directly or indirectly, with liba
ahmad and bazga abdullah during the custodial period of the sentence.
following the completion of his custodial
sentence, mr. ahmad will be subject to a probation order for a period of 12
months on the following terms:
i.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour
ii.
to report in person to a probation officer
within 48 hours of the completion of the custodial portion of your sentence and
thereafter as required
iii.
not to contact or communicate, in any way,
either directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means with
liba ahmad or bazga abdullah
iv.
not to attend within 50 metres of the place
where you know liba ahmad or bazga abdullah to live, work, go to school,
frequent or any other place you know them to be
v.
to participate in any counselling as recommended
to you by your probation officer and to sign any releases to enable your
probation officer to monitor your attendance of completion of such counselling
i will impose a dna order.  assault is a
secondary designated offence pursuant to
s. 487.051(3)
of the
criminal code
.
as such, the imposition of a dna order is discretionary.  after weighing and
balancing all the relevant considerations, i find that making the order is in
the best interests of the administration of justice.  mr. ahmad has a lesser expectation
of privacy post-conviction and there is minimal intrusion and impact on
his privacy and security interest.  whereas the offending
conduct involved a serious act of violence against a child for which mr. ahmad
lacks any insight.
the victim fine surcharge applies.  mr. ahmad
has 120 days to pay.
released:  november 26, 2025
signed:
justice tomovski