ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. barker-campbell
, 2025 oncj 90
date:
2025 02 13
court
file no.:  central east - newmarket - 23-91106674
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
devonte barker-campbell
before
justice m. townsend
heard
on february 13, 2025
ruling
on the crown application for abridgement of time for service
and
filing of
charter
materials released on february 13, 2025
r. jahani-geran.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
r. kodsy......................................
counsel for the defendant devonte barker-campbell
townsend j.:
the touchstone in this and in all criminal
trials must always be fairness. fairness to the accused, fairness to the crown,
and fairness to the administration of justice. as the adage goes: justice must
not only be done, but also seen to be done. transparency in proceedings is a
hallmark of that fairness which must be afforded to all parties.
in the justice system here in canada, we as
judges and lawyers thrive on rules: rules of evidence, rules of interpretation,
and rules of criminal proceedings. rules are in place for a reason, and rules
are meant to be followed. the following of established rules provides for a
level playing field as between the parties and ensures that everyone knows
their obligations to each other and to the court.
rule 1.04(1) of the
criminal proceeding rules
states: "these rules are intended to provide for the just determination of
every criminal proceeding, and shall be liberally construed to secure
simplicity in procedure, fairness in administration and the elimination of
unjustifiable expense and delay."
in the application before me, the crown seeks an
abridgement of time for the service and filing of its form 2 response to the
applicant's form 1
charter
application.
mr. kodsy, on behalf of mr. barker-campbell,
opposes the application, and submits that the crown ought to be prohibited,
based on a breach of the
criminal proceeding rules
, from responding to
the defence
charter
application, and should be ordered to "stand
mute" on the defence application.
rule 1.1 of the
criminal rules of the ontario
court of justice
states:
1.1 (1) the fundamental objective of these
rules is to ensure that proceedings in the ontario court of justice are dealt
with justly and efficiently.
(2)  dealing with proceedings justly and
efficiently includes
(a) dealing with
the prosecution and the defence fairly;
(b) recognizing
the rights of the accused;
(c) recognizing
the interests of witnesses; and
(d) scheduling
court time and deciding other matters in ways that take into account
(i)  the
gravity of the alleged offence,
(ii)  the
complexity of what is in issue,
(iii)  the
severity of the consequences for the accused and for others affected, and
(iv)  the
requirements of other proceedings.
duty of counsel, paralegals, agents and
litigants
(3)  in every proceeding, each counsel,
paralegal, agent and litigant shall, while fulfilling all applicable
professional obligations,
(a)  act in
accordance with the fundamental objective; and
(b)  comply with
(i)  these
rules,
(ii)  practice
directions, and
(iii)  orders
made by the court.
duty of court
(4)  the court shall take the fundamental
objective into account when
(a)  exercising
any power under these rules; or
(b)  applying or
interpreting any rule or practice direction.
this rule recognizes crucial considerations that
are to be considered by the court and the parties at all stages of a court
proceeding.
rule 3.1 relates to time for service, and
states:
(1)  an application in form 1 shall be
served and filed with proof of service at least 30 days before the date of the
hearing of the application.
(2)  a response in form 2 shall be served
and filed with proof of service at least 15 days before the date of the hearing
of the application.
(3)  despite subrules (1) and (2), the time
periods set out in those subrules may be shortened or lengthened
(a)  by a local
practice direction;
(b)  by an order
of the court; or
(c)  with the
consent of the parties, except as described in rule 3.2.
rule 4.1 of the same rules states: "when
conducting a hearing or trial, the court has the power to make any order or
direction in relation to the conduct of the proceeding that would assist in
ensuring that it is conducted in accordance with the fundamental objective set
out in rule 1.1."
the defence position in opposing the application
simply is that the crown did not comply with the rules, filed their response 2
days prior to the trial, and therefore time for abridgment for service and
filing ought to be denied.
the crown has, to use a colloquial phrase,
fallen on their sword. ms. jahani-geran admits that she made a mistake. she
submitted to the court that she has a very busy practice, she has hundreds of
active files, she went away on vacation, and missed the 15-day deadline for service
and filing.
mr. kodsy, on behalf of mr. barker-campbell
relies on a number of cases, in particular
r. v. dumont
,
2000 canlii 16861 (on ca)
, o.j. no.
3413 from the ontario court of appeal. in
dumont
, the defence filed a
charter
application, the crown filed no responding material but sought leave to call
viva voce evidence on the application. the trial judge denied this request and
precluded the crown from calling evidence on the application.
the court of appeal stated the following at
paragraph 6:
"in our view, the routine disclosure
provided by the crown does not eliminate the need for compliance with the clear
wording of rule 35.05(3). at the very least, the crown could have given notice
of the basis for its opposition to the
charter
application. we agree
with the summary conviction appeal court judge that the trial judge had a
discretion, pursuant to rule 2, to permit the crown to lead
viva voce
evidence despite noncompliance with the rule. we also agree that, in the
circumstances of this case, there was no error in the exercise of that
discretion in refusing to waive compliance with rule 30.05(3)."
the court of appeal and the summary conviction
appeal court specifically reference the trial judge's discretion.
the case before me is different than in
r. v.
dumont
. the case before me is even different than the case before my
brother justice kenkel in
r. v. yung
,
o.j. no 3218
wherein his
honour notes that there was no explanation given by the crown as to why there
was no response filed.
mr. kodsy also relies on the decision of justice
mcisaac in
r. v. b.l.s
.,
o.j. no. 4688
wherein justice mcisaac
ordered the crown to "stand mute" on an application to direct funding
to retain experts.
the effect of the crown "standing
mute" on an order to direct funding for the retainer of experts is far
different than the effect of the crown “standing mute” on an application to
exclude evidence.
it seems to me that directing one party to
"stand mute" on any type of application before the ontario court of justice
tugs at the strings of fairness that permeate the fabric of the administration
of justice.
i accept ms. jahani-geran's explanation as to
why the response is filed late. people make mistakes. this is not a habit of
ms. jahani-geran, nor do i find any bad faith on her part. if the roles were
reversed and an experienced defence counsel with no history of non-compliance
with the rules came before this court with a similar explanation, i suspect
that the reasoning and decision would be exactly the same.
in
r. v. dryden
,
2024 o.j. no. 4821
,
again my brother justice kenkel made the following comments at paragraphs 2
through 4:
the defence submits that the crown
should not be able to call evidence in response to the defence
charter
applications as they did not respond in a timely way. the response to the
sections 8,9 and 10 application came only two business days before trial. the
ss 7 and 9 "overholding" application was filed on the same date but
separately. it appears the crown who responded to the first notice of
application was unaware of the second.
rules are procedural and intended to
facilitate the fair and expeditious determination of
charter
issues at
trial. the notice provisions ensure that neither party is taken by surprise and
that both parties are aware of the factual and legal basis for the application
-
r v grant
,
2014 onsc 1479
at para
19
.
i'm satisfied that the timing of the
crown's response on the sections 8,9 and 10(b) application does not take the
defence by surprise as it refers to information already present in the
disclosure. the factual and legal basis of the application is plain. it would
not be unfair to permit the crown to call evidence in response.
in the case before me, the defence application
was filed exactly one month before the trial, giving the crown 2 weeks to
respond. while i was not present for the judicial pre-trial, nor was i present
for the date setting, i suspect that it was always contemplated that there
would be a
charter
application on this matter. the crown response surely
cannot be taking the defence by surprise.
the crown is not asking for an adjournment,
simply that this court exercise its discretion and abridge the time for service
and filing. exactly the discretion that was recognized in
r. v. dumont
.
trial fairness must be preserved. while the
crown should have complied with the rules, i see no prejudice to mr.
barker-campbell in allowing the crown to respond to his
charter
application.
both the form 1 and the form 2 are of sufficient
quality that together with evidence on the
voir dire
they can be
adjudicated by this court.
the crown's application to abridge the time for
service and filing of responding materials is granted.
we will proceed to trial.
released:  february 13, 2025
signed:
justice m. townsend