ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. hagi
, 2025 oncj 147
date:
2025 03 13
court
file no.:  toronto region
21-45003667
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
saieed hagi
before
justice c. faria
heard
on november 23, 2023, and february 18, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on march 13, 2025
frank schembri.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
cyd israel...............................................................
counsel for the accused saieed hagi
faria j.:
i.
introduction
on november 23, 2023, saieed hagi pled guilty to
possessing a loaded firearm on july 24, 2021, in breach of a s. 109 firearm prohibition
contrary to
ss. 95(1)
and
117.01(1)
of the
criminal code
.
i received an enhanced pre-sentence report
(epsr), along with relevant exhibits and heard submissions for sentencing on
february 18, 2025. he took over 14 months for the epsr that provides the
relevant social context factors of mr. hagi’s life to assist with the
sentencing task.
the crown recommends 5 years in the penitentiary
minus pre-sentence custody (psc) under
summers
. he emphasized
that denunciation and deterrence are the primary applicable principles, which
are particularly supported by the aggravating fact that mr. hagi was on parole
for a manslaughter conviction at the time.
the defence recommends 4 years minus psc.  while
agreeing that denunciation and deterrence are the primary applicable principles,
counsel argues that
duncan
credit and social context factors mitigate in favour of a lower sentence.
the parties agree to the ancillary orders.
i reserved my decision. these are my reasons for
sentence.
ii.
facts
at about 1:20 a.m. on july 24, 2021, toronto
ambulance services called the toronto police about an unconscious person in the
driver’s seat of a motor vehicle. officers arrived to see paramedics trying to
wake up saieed hagi. once responsive, mr. hagi exited the motor vehicle, and
the officers began investigating him for impaired driving. while this was
happening, a paramedic saw a firearm in the driver’s side footwell of the
vehicle and told the officers about it.
an officer seized the firearm. it was a glock 19
with one round of ammunition in the chamber and a magazine inserted. the
officer unloaded the firearm at the scene. a second firearm, a polymer 80, was
found in the vehicle during a subsequent search pursuant to a search warrant.
at the time, mr. hagi was prohibited from
possessing a firearm pursuant to a s. 109 order that had been made on june 13,
2016.
iii.
saieed hagi’s circumstances
mr. hagi is now 30 years old; he was 27 at the
time he committed the offences. he is the eldest of 7 siblings and identifies
as a black man of somali and ethiopian heritage and muslim faith. he speaks 4
languages. his mother first fled somalia to kenya, then was sponsored to come
to canada by his father when she was 21 years old. she was a “stay-at-home
mother”. his father, 15 years older, had been a teacher in ethiopia but worked
as a long-haul truck driver after he immigrated to canada.
because of this job, mr. hagi’s father was away
from the family for long periods during his childhood. their relationship is a distant
one. mr. hagi is close to his mother and his sisters, but he felt the absence
of a male role model as he grew up. though he perceived his upbringing to be
“middle class,” his family struggled. all 9 of them lived in a 3-bedroom
apartment in toronto’s “dixon” neighbourhood. he described his family’s building
as “run-down”, “dirty”, and ‘always under construction.”
he went to the local primary and middle school but
got into trouble. he acknowledges responsibility for his behaviours but
reflected that the disciplinary measures – multiple suspensions – did not help
him. to get away from the negative school environment of the neighbourhood, he
attended a private muslim school for a while. when he returned to the local
public system for high school, he was streamed into applied classes. this
undermined his confidence, and he quit in grade 10. after an educational hiatus,
he returned to school. when he was 19, he enrolled at george brown college, but
that endeavour was curtailed by an arrest for charges that were ultimately
withdrawn.
mr. hagi has been gainfully employed at times. when
he was 17, he worked at hudson’s bay while participating in an “at-risk youth”
program. at the age of 18, he worked as a baggage handler at pearson
international airport. later, as an adult, he worked in a low-paying factory
job.
mr. hagi is described as goodhearted, helpful,
respectful, and loyal.
mr. hagi reports being racially profiled by
police, including through physical intimidation while in his mother’s presence.
both he and his family reported incidents of police involvement they perceived
as unwarranted and particularly aggressive.  notably, his mother’s advice to
stay inside was not palatable to mr. hagi as a teenager. mr. hagi described the
dixon neighbourhood as “toxic,” yet this was his social circle.
street gangs call dixon home, and some residents
live anti-social lifestyles. in an interview with the espr author, a family
friend discussed the vulnerability of the youth in this neighbourhood due to
poverty, absent fathers, and poor conditions. youth are exploited by older
people who recruit them into criminal activity for financial gain.
there is also gun violence and frequent crime,
resulting in a longstanding heavy police presence in the area. mr. hagi recalled
being questioned by police when he was as young as 12 years old, and he was just
15 when he witnessed a shootout while leaving a mosque. he was shot at twice
between the ages of 15 and 17.
by age 15, mr. hagi began suffering from anxiety
and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) because of his
experiences.  this continues today. both his sister and his mother confirm that
he is constantly anxious, worried, paranoid, scared, looking over his shoulder,
and afraid of noises. in addition to mental health needs, mr. hagi requires
medication for chronic shoulder pain from an injury he sustained in a car
accident when he was 17.
he recognizes that gun violence both became
normalized for him and made him afraid, admitting he dealt with this by
choosing to carry a gun by age 19. it was his involvement in relationships with
anti-social peers and in neighbourhood conflicts that led to his 2016 guilty
plea to manslaughter. that offence “involved a firearm”.
he was sentenced to a 9-year jail sentence minus
his pre-sentence custody, requiring him to serve 7 years in federal prison. during
his incarceration, mr. hagi lost contact with previous associates. once
released, he tried to maintain that distance, started a carpentry apprenticeship,
and changed his life.
he was successful for a year and a half; then,
he was not. mr. hagi spoke in detail to the epsr author about what happened in
the days leading to the current offence. his life was threatened. as a result,
he couldn’t sleep, and he was paranoid.  so, he returned to what he knew. he drank
alcohol to relieve the anxiety and then obtained two firearms to “protect”
himself – leading to the offences before the court.
iv.
legal principles
sections
718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
guide sentencing judges with the
complex task of sentencing.
every
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender (s.718.1).
the
sanction imposed should have one or more of the following objectives (s.718):
to denounce
unlawful conduct;
to deter the
offender and other persons from committing offences;
to separate
offenders from society, where necessary;
to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
to provide
reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done
to victims and to the community.
sentences
for similar offences committed by similar offenders should receive similar
sentences (
s. 718.2
(b)).
aggravating
and mitigating factors relating to the circumstances of the offences and the
offender must be considered (
s. 718.2
(a)).
the
evidence filed at the sentencing hearing calls for the consideration of the harsh
pre-sentence incarceration conditions.
v.
analysis
on
the one hand, the aggravating factors in this case are clear and the
determination of a sentence may appear to be easy: deterrence and denunciation
are the primary considerations that overwhelm all others, so a 5-year jail
sentence is fit. indeed, the two cases the crown provided,
r. v. omar
,
2015 onca 207
and
r. v. owusu
,
2019 onca 712
, support a higher sentence.
these
aggravating factors are:
i.
mr. hagi was on parole at the time of the offences.
ii.
the prior offence requiring parole was manslaughter that “involved a
firearm.”
iii.
he had not one but two firearms.
iv.
the firearms were in a public place – in a motor vehicle on a public
street.
v.
one of the firearms was easily accessible to him in the footwell of the
driver’s seat where he was sitting.
vi.
there was an increased danger of him accessing one of the firearms while
impaired – he was so intoxicated that he needed the assistance of paramedics.
neither
party chose to provide details of mr. hagi’s admission that his manslaughter
conviction “involved a firearm”.  therefore, the weight of that factor is no
more and no less than what it appears on its face to be.
however,
there are significant mitigating factors that also merit serious consideration,
and upon which i will elaborate. they are:
i.
mr. hagi pled guilty.
ii.
mr. hagi was in lockdown for a significant period of his pre-sentence incarceration.
iii.
his social context attenuated his moral culpability.
iv.
he has demonstrated good rehabilitative potential.
guilty plea
mr.
hagi’s guilty plea was not an early one. in fact, he set trial dates. however,
he also indicated to his prior counsel, several times, that he did want to
plead. as his counsel ms. israel stated, sometimes it takes time for an accused
to find his “fit” with a lawyer. his eventual guilty plea nonetheless obviated
the crown from having to meet its burden and the witnesses from being
inconvenienced. it also provided a benefit to the criminal justice system. in
this jurisdiction, resources are tight, and several trials are stacked into
every trial court. the plea is meaningful in this way.
in
addition, guilty pleas generally demonstrate accountability and remorse. in
this case, it is particularly so. this is because mr. hagi has demonstrated
specific remorse and insight as follows:
i.
all those who met with the epsr author spoke of mr.
hagi as being remorseful – he spoke to each of them about his regret for having
committed the offences. this included his sister, his mother, his imam, a
family friend, and the facilitator of urban rez solutions.
ii.
while in custody, he mentored dixon youth through a
program aimed at guiding young people in his community away from a life of
crime. the program was facilitated by the director of his mosque.
iii.
he was forthcoming and direct with the epsr author about the offences he
committed. he admitted how he committed them, why he committed them, the
options he had and the choices he made. he made no excuses and gave no
justifications. that is unusual.
iv.
he also articulated that while incarcerated “i’m not the only one doing
time, my family is too.”
v.
during his opportunity to address the court, mr. hagi was straightforward
in his apology, acknowledged his risk factors, and articulated a plan to
minimize those risk factors upon release.
therefore,
the guilty plea is particularly significant as a demonstration of remorse.
duncan credit
the
defence filed a document provided by the toronto south detention centre (tsdc) describing
mr. hagi’s incarceration conditions following his arrest for the current
offences. the period documented between october 26, 2022 and february 11, 2025,
is the period after serving his previous sentence, and awaiting this sentence.
the numbers show that:
i.
he was in lockdown on 274 days – 32.6% of the time.
ii.
for 32.6% of this incarceration, he only had 30 minutes total per day to
access a shower, exercise in the yard, and make phone calls. this is lockdown
protocol.
iii.
he also spent 46 days triple-bunked – being one of three men living in a
cell made for two.
iv.
on 9 occasions, he was both in lockdown and triple-bunked.
v.
the
reason, or
one
of the reasons for lockdowns for 97% of
the time spent in lockdown was due to “staff shortages”, 266 of 274 days.
mr.
hagi describes not knowing if it is day or night, the bright lights feeling
like torture, the hygienic standards deteriorating, and having no access to hot
water during lockdowns.
when
not in lockdown, the jail is often overpopulated, and there are insufficient
amenities such as benches, tables, showers, and telephones for the inmates to
use.
in
addition, mr. hagi’s health was not properly attended to. he requires pain
medication but did not always get it on time. he also requires mental health
care but got none.
as
i and other courts have previously stated, t
he number
of these lockdowns, and particularly, “staff shortages” being the main reason
for these lockdowns, demonstrates a persistent institutional disregard to the
human resource requirements of running this jail. it is a decision that
deprives inmates of liberty and dignity within the institution, contrary to the
institution’s own expectations and standards. these deprivations, imposed on a
regular basis negatively impacts the physical and mental health of those
awaiting trial, and those serving their sentence. mr. hagi is just one example
of the impact of these deprivations.
serving
time under these conditions warrants a meaningful reduction in sentence.
social context
mr.
hagi’s social context has a direct link to his offending. in the first
instance, at the age of 20, he was involved in the context of the violent conflicts
in his neighbourhood. the second time, for these offences, he was: first,
threatened because of those old relationships, and second, resorted to the familiar
option available to deal with the threat within his social context – gun
possession.
this
epsr is relevant to understanding what choices mr. hagi made and why. the
additional value is that this report allowed him to reflect and then communicate
those reflections to the court.
mr.
hagi appears to understand that his social context was a disadvantaged and
challenging one that put him in an environment with limited choices.  but
unlike many, he appreciates his agency and options. he understands the choices
he made, but also that he could and should have chosen differently. he does not
spend time justifying his choices but rather reflects on the fact that,
nonetheless, he is capable of choosing a positive, pro-social path. for instance,
he explained:
“that if he could go back and do things differently, he
would not secure a firearm and would ‘do the normal thing’ and report his
safety concerns to the police. in hindsight, saieed regrets not leaving the
province to avoid potential danger. he disclosed that he would rather fall victim
to gun violence than risk reincarceration because of the detrimental effects it
has had on him and his family.”
these
reflections are not frequently made by young men, who grew up in a community
where gun violence and police distrust, stemming from racial profiling, is
prevalent. social context and mr. hagi’s engagement in understanding his own
social context, is a significant mitigating factor.
mr.
hagi’s epsr in this case, is an example of how valuable the work of the
sentencing and parole project is to the task of sentencing. an epsr can have a
valuable role in changing or contributing to change, in the lives of black
people. particularly, young black men involved in the criminal justice system
in ontario. for this reason, as i and other courts have stated, 14 months is
too long to wait for this essential information. lack of funding for these
reports is affecting both individuals and the efficiency of the sentencing
process in the criminal justice system in this jurisdiction.
rehabilitation efforts
mr. hagi has put his time while incarcerated to
good use, which is not easy to do. in addition to participating in the dixon
youth mentoring program with his imam, he has:
i.
participated in the 16-week black employment support program with urban
rez solutions, including one-on-one employment coaching.
ii.
completed the overdose prevention program by parkdale/pasan.
iii.
participated in the forgiveness project team building program.
iv.
completed the john howard anger management program.
v.
completed 27 different programs in areas such as problem-solving, life
skills, relationships, substance abuse, planning, black identity, media, parenting,
and employment.
vi.
obtained his ontario secondary school diploma.
vii.
enrolled in principles of marketing at centennial college, with the
expectation of completing the course in april 2025. he is one of only two
enrolled students.
the
breadth and volume of this work are both unusual and impressive. he also has
strong family support – the family has moved away from the dixon area, and many
of his sisters attended court. mr. hagi’s plan on release will place significant
geographical distance between him and his previous environment.
this
all speaks to his positive rehabilitation potential. rehabilitation does not override
the primacy of denunciation and deterrence, but it is still a relevant
consideration.
balancing
the supreme court stated in
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
11
:
this court has on many occasions noted the importance of
giving wide latitude to sentencing judges. since they have,
inter alia
,
the advantage of having heard and seen the witnesses, sentencing judges are in
the best position to determine, having regard to the circumstances, a just and
appropriate sentence that is consistent with the objectives and principles set
out in the
criminal
code
in this regard.
the supreme court recognizes the sentencing
judge’s task in determining a fit sentence, requires one to: balance and weigh
the facts; reflect on the role and impact of the offence in the community; consider
the jurisprudence; and ensure the uniqueness of the individual before the court
is reflected in the sanction.
mr. hagi caused a man’s death. he was on parole
for that and in contravention of his prior s. 109 order, when he possessed two
firearms in a motor vehicle, while intoxicated. firearms are made to hurt and
kill human beings. in toronto, they are doing just that in the hands of many.
gun violence is a plague in our community. it is causing tragedy after tragedy,
and inflicting unspeakable pain on individuals, families, and our city. those
who possess illegal loaded firearms must be sanctioned firmly to reflect the
denunciation of that conduct and to deter others from engaging in that conduct.
mr. hagi is remorseful and done his best to
demonstrate that remorse. he has reflected and vocalized important insights. he
has improved himself while incarcerated in unacceptable conditions, and within
a context of racial and socio-economic disadvantage. furthermore, he has done
this while experiencing mental and physical health challenges.
in my view, the balancing of all the factors,
leads to a sentence on the low end of the range for these offences.
vi.
sentence
mr. hagi, i sentence you to a global 4 years in
jail minus psc
.
you will serve another 5 months in jail. it will be apportioned as follows:
count
6: possession of a loaded firearm,
s. 95(1)
: 3 years jail
count
9: possession of a firearm while prohibited,
s. 117.01(1)
: 1 year jail, consecutive
to count 6
i will order that you provide a dna sample and
another s. 109 order prohibiting you from possessing weapons for life.
i thank both counsel for their assistance,
particularly ms. israel’s thorough submissions.
released:  march 13, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria
r. v. summers
,
2014 scc 26
r. v. duncan
,
2016 onca 754
r. v. duncan
,
2016 onca 754
exhibit 3: enhanced pre-sentence report, saieed hagi, january 29, 2025, by leah
kay, at pg.7.
pre-sentence custody is 869 days x 1.5, 1304 days, or 43 months.
pre-sentence custody of  730 x 1.5 = 1095 days, or 3 yrs, + 1 day
pre-sentence custody of 139 days x 1.5, is 209 days,