ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. wickham
, 2025 oncj 461
date:
2025 09 05
court
file no.:  newmarket 4911-998-24-91110589-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
leon stanley wickham
before
justice michael perlin
heard
on july 16, august 7, and september 4, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 5, 2025
lindsay young.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
the defendant leon wickham...............................................................
on his own behalf
perlin j.:
a.
overview
leon wickham is charged with assault. he represented himself at trial.
there were three crown witnesses: marika edwards; michael green; and david
velaapin. mr. wickham chose not to testify or call other defence evidence. on
the day judgment was to be delivered, mr. wickham applied to re-open his cross-examination
of ms. edwards. the crown consented and i allowed further cross-examination.
ms. edwards is the complainant. she and her ex-husband own a large
residential property in richmond hill, which mr. wickham leases and lives in.
ms. edwards was notified by the city of richmond hill that it had
detected a continuous water flow on the property, which may have been
indicative of a water leak. on november 14, 2024, she attended the property
with mr. green and mr. velaapin, two plumbers whom she had hired to investigate
the issue.
the evidence of all three witnesses was consistent that ms. edwards
knocked and rang the doorbell. after receiving no answer, ms. edwards used a
key to unlock the door and enter. while the witnesses’ evidence varied on
precisely what happened next, they agreed that while ms. edwards was in the
process of entering, mr. wickham (whom they all identified in court) loudly
confronted her and used his hands to push her out. there has been no suggestion
that this was consensual. whether this conduct is a criminal assault depends on
the application of the defence of property in
s. 35
of the
criminal code
,
r.s.c. 1985, c. c-46.
b.
issues
to determine whether mr. wickham has a valid defence under
s. 35
, i will
(1) make findings of fact, (2) discuss general principles regarding the defence
of property, and (3) discuss the application of each of its four elements.
c.
analysis
1.
factual findings
ms. edwards testified that she attended the property after providing
proper notice. (i will discuss the notice issue later in these reasons.) she
met the plumbers. they investigated the water issue in a second unit at the
property, not occupied by mr. wickham’s family. next, she attended mr.
wickham’s unit. she rang the doorbell and knocked. she unlocked the door,
yelled “hello” several times and entered. she recalls putting her key in her
pocket and turning to the plumbers who were behind her, still outside the front
door. she was three or four feet inside when she found mr. wickham in her face
yelling “get out”. she testified that mr. wickham’s son tried to shut the door
and that mr. wickham shoved her several times toward the door. he turned her around
and shoved her “super hard” on her back, expelling her from the property. he
closed the door.
some things became clear during ms. edwards’ testimony—particularly
during cross examination by mr. wickham and in further cross-examination when
she was recalled. the landlord-tenant relationship between them has become
highly acrimonious. ms. edwards disagrees with mr. wickham on many issues
relating to the tenancy. she expressed frustration with what she believes to
have been thwarted, legal efforts to manage the property while mr. wickham has
resided in it. in her evidence, including when she was recalled, she referred
to ongoing proceedings in other forums relating to the property. many of these
issues fall far beyond the scope of these proceedings. i do not need to resolve
them and do not have an evidentiary record to do so.
the acrimonious relationship is relevant in that it gives me reason to
be cautious about ms. edwards’ evidence. in light of the issues between mr.
wickham and ms. edwards, the crown and mr. wickham both urge me to rely on the
evidence of mr. green and mr. velaapin. neither witness had any relationship of
any significance with either ms. edwards or mr. wickham. they are independent
and have no apparent reason to mislead the court.
mr. green testified that the whole altercation took “a minute or less”.
ms. edwards,
knocked three times, rung [
sic
] the doorbell a few
times, and then, once […] there was no luck with that, she, uh, attempted to
enter. used the key. uh, she put one foot in, as soon as she got to the
doorway, then she met, um, she met leon, i believe, uh, mr. wickham, and he
just, as soon as she went in, he just pushed her out. that was just basically
it. she kind of fell backwards into me.
mr.
green had been standing behind ms. edwards. he testified that mr. wickham
"seemed a bit excited" saying "you're not supposed to be doing
that". he recalled hearing, "[y]ou did not give notice. you can't
come in here. are you crazy?" he recalled after “the shoving”, hearing mr.
wickham say, “this is not right”. he recalled ms. edwards “was in shock maybe”.
mr.
velaapin testified that ms. edwards rang the doorbell three times and knocked
on the door three times. she then used her key and announced her presence. he
testified that “[w]hen she opened the door [mr. wickham] kinda shouted at her
to get out of the house. that's when there were a few segments of struggling.
and then she was just pushed out."
mr.
wickham argues that i should reject ms. edwards’ evidence because it is
inconsistent with the evidence of mr. green and mr. velaapin in some respects.
for example, she testified that she entered three or four feet into the home.
mr. green testified she only entered about one foot. mr. velaapin disagreed
with aspects of ms. edwards’ account.
i
am not persuaded that any inconsistencies between their evidence are significant
or undermine ms. edwards’ credibility. all three witnesses provided varying
accounts on precisely what happened. this is not surprising, as they were each
asked—in different ways—to parse the details of an exceedingly short
interaction that occurred about eight months earlier. i do not find that the
variations undermine the credibility or reliability of their overall accounts.
i
accept the evidence of all three witnesses on the points on which they agree.
first, ms. edwards rang the doorbell and knocked on the door. second, she was
in the process of entering when mr. wickham confronted her. third, mr. wickham
used his hands to push ms. edwards out of the home. fourth, in the very brief time
surrounding the pushing, mr. wickham made various utterances: like “get out”
(as ms. edwards and mr. green recalled) or “get the fuck out” (as mr. velaapin
recalled), "[y]ou did not give notice. you can't come in here. are you
crazy?" (as mr. green recalled), and “this is not right” or “you’re not
supposed to be doing that” (as mr. green recalled).
further,
i accept the evidence of mr. green that the pushing expelled ms. edwards from
the home causing her to fall back into mr. green, who was standing behind her
when all this occurred. this evidence is consistent with ms. edwards’
description of a final, forceful shove that expelled her from the property. mr.
velaapin did not describe this event. he also did not suggest it did not occur.
mr.
wickham asks the court to conclude that ms. edwards was an equal aggressor in
this interaction. he submits that in cross-examination mr. velaapin described
ms. edwards trying to push the door open while the accused pushed back against
the door. in mr. wickham’s submission, mr. velaapin’s evidence depicted ms.
edwards physically resisting mr. wickham’s efforts to expel her.
having
listened carefully to mr. velaapin's recorded evidence, i do not understand him
to have described a struggle in which ms. edwards was an aggressor, actively
resisting mr. wickham's efforts to expel her. i do not understand mr. velaapin
to have suggested that ms. edwards pushed on the door, appearing to know that
someone else was on the opposite side.
rather,
i understand him to have testified that ms. edwards was leaning on the door
simply to enter, at which point she faced resistance – the accused or his son
pushing back against the door and then the accused pushing her body with his
hands. mr. velaapin testified that he observed mr. wickham "trying to, uh,
put her out of the house, firstly pushing the door." i do not understand
mr. velaapin to have suggested that ms. edwards, upon facing resistance,
responded with force of her own. mr. velaapin testified that at that point he
heard mr. wickham tell ms. edwards, "just to get out of the house".
he described ms. edwards' response to mr. wickham's initial efforts to expel
her: she "was still trying to remove the key and just trying to remove her
feet from where she was in the door and the outside". she was able to do
that "after you kind of push her".
elsewhere
in his evidence, mr. velaapin described a "struggle". mr. wickham
pointed to this as evidence that ms. edwards was an aggressor. i reject that
interpretation of the evidence. i understand mr. velaapin to have used the word
"struggle" as a synonym for "altercation", without
intending to suggest that the altercation involved two mutual aggressors.
elsewhere in his evidence he described what he meant by "struggle".
he testified that when ms. edwards "opened the door [you, mr. wickham]
kinda shouted at her to get out of the house. that's when there were a few
segments of struggling. and then she was just pushed out." he explained,
"the struggling was like trying to push her out […] the door. and then she
was like pushed with the hands."
in
any event, if i am wrong and there is any ambiguity in mr. velaapin's evidence
and whether it suggests ms. edwards was also an aggressor, the record contains
the evidence of mr. green, describing mr. wickham as the only aggressor and ms.
edwards as simply a recipient of that aggression. i accept this unambiguous
description of the events to be true. i reject mr. wickham’s suggestion that
the evidence shows ms. edwards was an aggressor. the evidence does not raise any
doubt on that issue.
2.
the defence of property
the defence of property is found in
s. 35(1)
of the
criminal code
.
it provides a complete defence to an offence where
i.
the accused believes “on reasonable grounds that
they are in peaceable possession of property”,
ii.
the accused believes “on reasonable grounds that
another person […] is about to enter, is entering or has entered the property
without being entitled by law to do so”,
iii.
the “act that constitutes the offence” was
“committed for the purpose of […] removing that person from the property” and
iv.
the “act committed” was “reasonable in the
circumstances”.
i
am satisfied that the defence of property has an air of reality in this case
and i must consider it. the air of reality test is satisfied where “there is
evidence on the record upon which a properly instructed jury acting reasonably
could acquit”: see e.g.,
r. v. edowen
,
2021 onsc 2157
, at paras.
16-18
. as
i will explain, two elements of the defence are clearly satisfied, and there is
a live dispute whether the others are satisfied. the defence is in play.
once
the defence is in play, mr. wickham, as the accused, has no burden of proof. his
defence will succeed unless the crown discharges its burden of proof. the crown’s
burden is to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that at least one element of the
defence is absent: see e.g.,
r. v. khill
,
2021 scc 37
, at para.
18
.
3.
elements 1 and 3: peaceable possession and defensive purpose
the
crown concedes it cannot prove the first and third elements are absent. i
agree.
although
mr. wickham did not testify, i accept he believed on reasonable grounds that he
was in peaceable possession of the property. the trial record includes emails
and text-messages between ms. edwards and a phone number and email address she
used to correspond with mr. wickham. the email address is in his name. the
email signature refers to the phone number with which ms. edwards was
corresponding. i find that he authored, or was at least aware of, the
correspondence purportedly from him. the text messages to ms. edwards assert
mr. wickham’s right to “[q]uiet enjoyment” of the property. his subjective
belief that he had peaceable possession of the property was objectively
reasonable. he and his family, as tenants, enjoyed statutory rights to privacy
and “reasonable enjoyment of the rental unit”: see
residential tenancies
act, 2006
, s.o. 2006, c. 17, ss. 22,
25
.
the
third branch of the defence is a defensive purpose – i.e.
,
that the
offence (here, the alleged assault) was committed to prevent entry of, or remove,
an intruder. i accept mr. wickham applied force to remove ms. edwards from the
property, which she had entered or was at least in the process of entering. his
utterances to ms. edwards that she “get out” or “get the fuck out” and his actions
in pushing her out show his intention was to expel a person he believed was an
intruder.
4.
element 2: reasonable belief of no lawful authority to enter
a
landlord’s authority to enter a tenanted property with notice is found in s. 27
the
residential tenancies act
. in part, s. 27(1) provides that “[a]
landlord may enter a rental unit in accordance with written notice given to the
tenant at least 24 hours before the time of entry […] [t]o carry out a repair
or replacement or do work in the rental unit.” subsection 27(3) specifies that
“[t]he written notice under subsection (1) […] shall specify the reason for
entry, the day of entry and a time of entry between the hours of 8 a.m.
and 8 p.m.” subsection 191(1) provides that “[a] notice or document is
sufficiently given to a person” if it is delivered in various ways, including
“(d) by leaving it in the mail box where mail is ordinarily delivered to the
person” or “(e) if there is no mail box, by leaving it at the place where mail
is ordinarily delivered to the person”. the act does not require that the
notice be received for the notice to be effective.
i
am satisfied that mr. wickham subjectively believed ms. edwards lacked lawful
authority to enter. although he did not testify, his utterances during the
alleged assault suggest he subjectively believed ms. edwards was entering
unlawfully: "[y]ou did not give notice. you can't come in here. are you
crazy?"
there
are good reasons to question whether mr. wickham’s belief was objectively
reasonable. a reasonable person in mr. wickham’s situation on november 14 would
have expected ms. edwards to enter only if she had good reason to believe she
was doing so lawfully. i accept ms. edwards’ evidence that she drafted a notice
letter referrable to november 14 (exhibit 3) and believed it had been
delivered. it was apparent from the various forms of correspondence that were
exhibits at trial—including those she was cross-examined on when she was
recalled—that ms. edwards was diligently trying to comply with the requirements
of the act. she believed she needed to enter the property with plumbers and was
trying to do so lawfully. in text messages, she told mr. wickham this letter
had been left for him. they debated the effectiveness of serving notice in that
manner. even if the notice was not received, a reasonable person in the
circumstances informed of the law would have known that for notice to be
effective, notice must be provided, but need not be received. the reasonable
person would also know that ms. edwards was trying to comply with the law as
she understood it. these factors undermine the objective reasonableness of mr.
wickham’s belief that ms. edwards would enter without at least believing she
had lawful authority.
that
said, i find that the crown has not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
wickham’s belief that ms. edwards lacked lawful authority was objectively unreasonable.
this is because the crown did not prove that the notice was given, so has not established
ms. edwards had lawful authority to enter.
a
notice letter (exhibit 1) was initially provided to mr. wickham on november 2
for a proposed november 9 entry with plumbers. in his text messages with ms.
edwards on november 2 (exhibit 2), mr. wickham demonstrated knowledge of the
letter’s contents, implicitly showing he had received it. however, ms. edwards
did not attend on november 9. the letter providing notice of entry for november
9 could not authorize her entry on november 14, when the alleged assault
occurred. subsection 27(3) of the act requires that notice specify “the day of
entry”.
ms.
edwards testified that a second notice letter—providing notice of entry for
november 14 (exhibit 3)—was left outside the doorway to the rental property by
either her or her ex-husband. she could not recall whether she or her ex-husband
had delivered that letter. in a text message she sent to mr. wickham shortly
after the letter was purportedly delivered, ms. edwards wrote “[a] letter has
been dropped off to you”. the passive voice suggests that ms. edwards had not
personally delivered the letter. in the text messages between the parties, ms.
edwards sometimes referred to letters having been dropped off, and at other
times refers to having personally delivered a letter: i.e.,
“i left you
a letter at your front door.”
i
cannot find that ms. edwards personally delivered the letter. she believed that
if she did not deliver it, her ex-husband did. she did not explain why she held
this belief. it would appear to be based on inadmissible hearsay. the crown called
no other evidence to prove the letter was delivered.
the
crown points to the text exchange on november 8 after the letter was purportedly
delivered. in it, ms. edwards told mr. wickham a letter had been delivered. he
responded he “would not have received the letter” unless it was put in the
mailbox. these texts do not prove the letter was delivered. ms. edwards’ text
reflects her belief, potentially based on hearsay, that the letter had been
delivered. in mr. wickham’s texts, it is apparent that he understood the letter
to be about notice to enter the property. i do not take this an implicit
admission to having received the letter: it would have been clear that the letter
ms. edwards referenced was a notice letter, even without receiving it; the text
messages on november 8 follow days of text messages back and forth about notice
to enter. mr. wickham’s texts come close, but ultimately do not satisfy me that
notice was provided.
on
this record, i cannot find that notice was provided. in the absence of notice,
i cannot find there was lawful authority to enter. absent proof that there was
lawful authority, i cannot say mr. wickham’s belief that there was no lawful
authority was objectively unreasonable. this branch of the defence is
satisfied. to be clear, i do not find his belief was objectively reasonable; i
only find that the crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that it was
objectively unreasonable.
having
reached this conclusion, i need not address the arguments on whether the
proposed manner of service (leaving a letter outside the front door) was
sufficient or whether the purpose of ms. edwards’ entry (to investigate the
water issue) provided a lawful basis for her to enter if notice was provided.
5.
element 4: was the force used reasonable
in the circumstances?
a.
the
reasonableness standard under s. 35(1)(d)
the
reasonableness standard is objective. the analysis is conducted from the
perspective of a reasonable person in the circumstances of the accused, armed
with the information known to the accused: see e.g.,
r. v. fleming
,
2014
oncj 26
, at para.
19
;
r. v. green
,
2017 oncj 705
, at para.
85
. there is
no closed list of factors that a court should consider in determining whether
conduct in defence of property is reasonable under
s. 35(1)
(d). the provision
directs courts to consider “the circumstances”, which i take to mean all
relevant circumstances.
when
deciding which circumstances are relevant, it may be helpful to refer to the
enumerated factors that a court must consider when applying the self-defence
provision in
s. 34
of the
criminal code
. both ss. 34 and 35 include a
requirement that “the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.” in s.
34—but not s. 35—parliament listed factors that a court must consider when conducting
the reasonableness analysis.
i
do not understand parliament’s decision to omit a list of factors in s. 35 as a
direction that courts may not consider the s. 34 factors in applying s. 35. parliament
chose to make the factors mandatory only under s. 34, so needed to list them
there, but not under s. 35. parliament clearly saw the factors as important
indicators of whether defensive conduct is reasonable. although they are not
mandatory under s. 35, a court may find them helpful when assessing whether a
defensive purpose in relation to property can justify criminal conduct.
i
accept that necessity and proportionality of the accused’s response are important
indicia of reasonableness. provisions like s. 35 have long been interpreted in accordance
with the common-law principle that force used to defend person or property must
be no more than necessary to defend and must not be disproportionate “to the
injury or harm [the force] is intended to prevent”. when discussing provisions
like s. 35, the supreme court has treated the concept of reasonable force as
synonymous with both proportionality and necessity. see
r. v. szczerbaniwicz
,
2010 scc 15
, at paras.
20
, 21;
r. v. baxter
(1975),
1975 canlii 1510 (on ca)
, 27 c.c.c. (2d) 96
(ont. c.a.), at p. 113;
r. v. gunning
,
2005 scc 27
, at paras.
24-25
;
r.
v. khill
,
2021 scc 37
, at paras.
62
, 63;
morris manning and peter
sankoff,
manning, mewett & sankoff: criminal law
, 5th ed., at paras.
14.63-64.
i
accept the crown’s submission that the court should consider other options open
to the accused at the time. doing so helps to assess whether the option
selected was necessary and proportionate. other options may include using less
force, or even waiting before responding: see e.g.,
r. v. trudeau
,
2017
oncj 793
, at para.
95
.
the
reasonableness standard does not require perfection. assessed in hindsight and outside
the “stressful and dangerous situation” faced by an accused person, it might be
easy to find alternative options or to say that the force used was excessive. recognizing
this, our law provides that when defensive force is applied, it need not be
weighed to a nicety and may be invoked based on reasonable mistakes of fact: see
e.g.,
szczerbaniwicz
, at para.
35
,
per
binnie j. (dissenting, but
not on this point);
r. v. cunha
,
2016 onca 491
, at paras.
7-8
, 24-27 (discussing
s. 34). the s. 35 defence will succeed unless the crown proves beyond a
reasonable doubt that the force used was not reasonable in the circumstances.
b.
was
the force used reasonable in the circumstances?
as
noted above, the evidence disclosed a short sequence of events in which the
complainant was in the process of entering the residence, and was perhaps only
a foot past the threshold, when the accused yelled at her, demanded that she
leave, and used his hands to push her out the door. he pushed her hard enough
to cause her to fall back into mr. green.
in
deciding whether this response was proportionate, i have considered the threat
ms. edwards posed. i find it was negligible. a reasonable person in mr.
wickham’s shoes, with his knowledge, would have found no urgent need to expel
her from the property immediately. mr. wickham and ms. edwards knew one
another. i find based on mr. wickham’s utterances—“[y]ou did not give notice.
you can't come in here.”—his unchanged, angry demeanour throughout their entire
interaction on november 14, and his close proximity to her when he shoved her that
he recognized ms. edwards as he began shoving her. their prior correspondence
demonstrates he knew she wished to enter the property with plumbers to investigate
a plumbing issue. he knew from the texts on november 8 that she took the view
that she had provided proper notice to enter. a reasonable person in his
situation with this knowledge would have perceived little if any threat: a
landlord, known to him, who was entering to address a plumbing issue, albeit at
an unexpected time (assuming the second notice letter was not received). there
was no true threat to his property rights. there is no suggestion that ms.
edwards or the men she was with were, or appeared to be, armed. a reasonable
person would not have perceived that ms. edwards and the men meant to cause mr.
wickham or his family any harm, meant to occupy, damage or steal from the
property, or meant to displace mr. wickham’s family from it. a reasonable person
would have expected ms. edwards and the plumbers to investigate the water
issue, perhaps make repairs, and leave. assuming notice was not provided, at
most, the intrusion involved a violation of the
residential tenancies act
by
someone who would have the right to enter—even over mr. wickham’s express
objections—simply by complying with the notice provisions of that act.
mr.
wickham emphasized that ms. edwards is taller than him. that may be so. but it
does not undermine my conclusion that the threat she posed to mr. wickham was
negligible. as noted above, i do not accept mr. wickham’s submission that the
evidence suggests ms. edwards was the aggressor, applying physical force to try
to enter the property over mr. wickham’s protests. i reject that interpretation
of the evidence.
the
force used was more than necessary to address that threat. i am satisfied that
there were other clear options open to mr. wickham that he should have taken
before resorting to violence, even allowing for the fact that mr. wickham may
have experienced stress, surprise and anger at seeing ms. edwards entering his
home unexpectedly. a conversation was the logical first step. only if that
failed should he have contemplated more aggressive actions. people should generally
not be allowed to resort to physical violence to defend a very minor intrusion
into real property without first at least trying to use words to resolve the
situation.
another
option would have been to loudly protest ms. edwards’ entry and demand—even
angrily—that she leave. mr. wickham did demand that ms. edwards “get out” or
“get the fuck out”. however, he did so either immediately before, immediately
after, or while pushing her. this was not a reasonable approach in the
circumstances. at a minimum, upon demanding that ms. edwards leave, mr. wickham
needed to give her reasonable time to do so before using physical force to
expel her.
going
further and pushing her was unreasonable. i am satisfied that mr. wickham’s
choice to forcefully push ms. edwards out of his home was entirely
disproportionate to the negligible threat she posed.
d.
disposition
people
in canada enjoy the right to defend their real property from reasonably
perceived unlawful threats, but only when they take reasonable steps to do so. on
the facts of this case, the force used was a clearly disproportionate response
to a negligible threat. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that it was
unreasonable for mr. wickham to push ms. edwards forcefully out of the
property.
since
i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. wickham did not use
reasonable force in the circumstances, within the meaning of
s. 35(1)
(d), his defence
under s. 35 fails. i find him guilty of assault.
released:  september 5, 2025.
signed:
justice michael perlin
considering my findings that ms. edwards was not an aggressor, there is no air
of reality to the defence of person under s. 34(1). there was no air of reality
that mr. wickham could have believed on reasonable grounds that force was being
used against him or someone else, or that there was a threat of such force (s.
34(1)(a)). there is no air of reality for a suggestion that the act of pushing
was committed to defend mr. wickham or another person from force or a threat of
force (s. 34(1)(b)).