ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. tomasone
, 2025 oncj 30
date:
2025 01 17
court
file no.:  newmarket 4911-998-24-91100286-00;
4911-999-24-91100103-00
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
franco tomasone
before
justice marcella henschel
heard
on november 13, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 17, 2025
mr. rob de chellis............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mr. ravi sahota........................................ counsel
for the defendant franco tomasone
henschel j.:
a.
overview
franco tomasone was charged with drive disqualified,
contrary to
s. 320.18
of the
criminal code
, and fail or refuse to provide
a breath sample, contrary to s. 350.15(1) of the
criminal code.
at the
outset of the trial mr. tomasone plead guilty to driving while disqualified. he
entered a not guilty plea to the refuse breath sample count and a brief and
focused trial was conducted.
the crown called a single witness, the
investigating police officer pc berezniy.
the primary issues at trial were whether pc
berezniy made a lawful approved screening device demand, specifically whether
he had reasonable grounds to suspect that mr. tomasone had alcohol in his body,
as required by
s. 320.27(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
; and whether mr.
tomasone “refused” to provide a breath sample.
at the conclusion of the trial, i found mr. tomasone
not guilty because i was not satisfied that the
actus reus
, that mr.
tomasone “refused” to provide a breath sample, was proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
i was also not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that there was a lawful
demand. i made my findings with reasons to follow. these are my reasons.
b.
summary of the facts
the facts are largely uncontested. the
interactions between pc berezniy and mr. tomasone were captured on pc
berezniy’s in-car camera recording system (icc).
on january 3, 2024, at approximately 7:40 p.m.,
pc berezniy was conducting general patrol on steeles avenue in vaughan,
ontario.  he saw a white van travelling southbound on islington avenue at
steeles avenue west and queried the ontario licence plate. it was registered to
mr. tomasone who was subject to a canada-wide driving prohibition. pc berezniy
decided to conduct a traffic stop to ensure the driver was licenced.
at 7:40 p.m., pc berezniy saw the driver (later
determined to be mr. tomasone), turn left on a red light. he activated his
cruiser lights and conducted the traffic stop. after pc berezniy activated his
lights, mr. tomasone made a right-hand turn and pulled over.
in respect of the left hand turn on the red
light, the icc recording shows that as mr. tomasone approached the intersection
travelling southbound, he moved into the left turn lane. prior to making the
left turn, a car travelling northbound passed through the intersection.  mr.
tomasone partially entered the intersection and another car travelling
northbound passed through the intersection. the light turned from yellow to
red. moments after the light turned red mr. tomasone turned left, clearing the
intersection.
at 7:41 p.m., after mr. tomasone stopped his
vehicle, pc berezniy approached the driver’s side of his van. mr. tomasone verbally
identified himself. at 7:42 p.m. pc berezniy confirmed mr. tomasone’s identity by
accessing the ministry of transportation database from his cruiser.
at 7:44 p.m. pc berezniy arrested mr. tomasone for
driving while prohibited and he was searched incident to arrest.
at 7:45 p.m., as pc berezniy was placing mr.
tomasone in the rear of the police cruiser, he asked him if he had been
drinking alcohol that evening. he responded “no”. pc berezniy told him he would
do a test to make sure he had not been drinking.
at 7:46 p.m. pc berezniy informed mr. tomasone
he was arrested for driving while prohibited and read him the rights to counsel
and caution. in response, when asked if he wished to call a lawyer “right now”,
mr. tomasone said he did not have a phone, and asked how he could call a
lawyer.
pc berezniy told mr. tomasone he could not give
him privacy to call a lawyer from the cruiser because everything was audio and
video recorded. he said after the paperwork was completed, he would be released
from the scene and could call the lawyer after he was released.
at 7:48 p.m., following the exchange about
counsel, pc berezniy read mr. tomasone a roadside approved screening device
(asd) demand. pc berezniy had an approved screening device with him in his
cruiser.
in response, mr. tomasone immediately asked if
he could make a phone-call first. pc berezniy responded that he could not
provide him a private phone call “right now” and explained he had to read him
his rights. he told him he was going to do a test for sobriety which was why he
asked if he had consumed alcohol.
pc berezniy testified that the demand he made was
not a mandatory screening device demand. he made the asd demand because he
suspected mr. tomasone may be impaired by alcohol based on his left turn on the
red light. pc berezniy testified he did not smell alcohol coming from mr.
tomasone when he made the demand. he noticed the smell of alcohol later while
mr. tomasone was seated in the rear of the police car.
pc berezniy explained that the basis for his asd
demand was his observations regarding the left turn on the red light and
because of mr. tomasone’s history. he knew he had previously been convicted of
impaired driving and suspected he may be impaired.
pc berezniy testified that mr. tomasone became
argumentative with him after he made the asd demand. their interactions between
7:48 p.m. and 8:52 p.m. about the asd demand as recorded on the icc system
included:
•
mr. tomasone asked: “why do i have to do the test? – i am not
understanding.”
•
pc berezniy explained he was previously arrested for impaired operation
and when he was travelling behind him, he turned left on a red light. he told
mr. tomasone he was going to make sure he was not impaired. he said based on
his driving and his history he was making the demand.
•
mr. tomasone responded he was right behind the other car.
•
pc berezniy told mr. tomasone he was not going to argue, it was
completely his choice if he did the test or not. mr. tomasone said he wanted to
talk to a lawyer, he wanted legal advice.
•
pc berezniy informed him that he could not force him to take the
test, but if he did not do so he would be charged with refusing to comply with
the demand which was an additional charge to driving while prohibited. he told
him his vehicle would be impounded and his license would be suspended.
•
pc berezniy said it was his choice. he explained he had to read
him the demand and tell him the consequences. the choice was his. he asked what
he wanted to do. mr. tomasone responded that he would just like counsel. he
said he wanted to go to the station and get legal counsel.
•
pc berezniy informed him that he would not drive him to the
station. he explained he would be released from the scene after paperwork was
completed. he said everything in the police car is audio and video recorded.
•
mr tomasone said he was not hiding anything. he did not know why
he was pulled over or why pc berezniy was requesting the test.
•
pc berezniy explained that he made a left turn on a red light.
mr. tomasone responded that the light was yellow. pc berezniy told him he was making
a demand and asked him again whether he wanted to do the test. he said it was
up to him.
•
mr. tomasone asked how bad the charge was if he did not do the
test.  pc berezniy said there would be an additional charge of refuse to comply
with a demand in addition to driving while prohibited and he would have another
court date to attend. he asked him what he wanted to do.
•
mr. tomasone said he just wanted to be released. pc berezniy said
he read him a demand. mr. tomasone said he was already being charged so he
might as well.
pc berezniy
asked him if he would comply. he said he wanted his lawyer before he did the
test.
•
pc berezniy explained that if he stopped a car to conduct a
sobriety check the driver has no option of calling a lawyer. mr. tomasone responded
he was not doing any test right now.
at
7:52 p.m., pc berezniy told mr. tomasone he would be charged. mr. tomasone asked
about his car being impounded. pc berezniy explained that his van was already
being impounded for driving while prohibited for 45 days. he explained that a
vehicle is impounded for 7 days for a refusal. he informed mr. tomasone he
would be charged with drive prohibited and with refusing to provide a breath
sample.
mr. tomasone said he did not want to be charged with “the other
one”, and asked why he was being charged. pc berezniy explained he was being
charged because he said he did not want to do the test. mr. tomasone said he
just wanted to talk to a lawyer. pc berezniy testified that he
believed mr. tomasone had consumed alcohol and did not want to do the test.
a second officer located two empty beer cans in
mr. tomasone’s vehicle and at 7:59 pc berezniy informed mr. tomasone that he
would also be charged with having readily available alcohol in the vehicle. mr.
tomasone said he did not know where the cans came from.
after
he was informed that he would be charged with refusing to provide a breath
sample, between 8:00 p.m. and the time of his release mr. tomasone asked to do
the asd test several times and said he was not refusing.
at
8:00 p.m. mr. tomasone asked pc berezniy: “sir can i just speak to a lawyer and
then do the test. i am not refusing i just want to speak to lawyer and see what
is going on and then i will do the test.”  pc berezniy responded that he was going
to do the paperwork to get him released and then he could call whoever he
liked. mr. tomasone said that then he would still be charged with the other
charges, and the alcohol in the car was not his. he said he had to move the van
and take it to a mechanic because it was leaking oil on his driveway.
at
8:02 p.m. pc berezniy provided mr. tomasone with his court date and fingerprint
appearance date.
at
8:04 p.m., approximately 16 minutes after the asd demand was first made, and 12
minutes after mr. tomasone was informed he was being charged with refusing to
provide a sample, mr. tomasone asked if he could “just do the sobriety test
then?” pc berezniy informed him that they were “already past that”. mr.
tomasone said he would just do the test, he did not mind, he did not care, he
had just wanted to talk to someone before he did it. he said he had just wanted
information, legal advice. he said he did not know the legal system and wanted
advice. he said, “you asked me do i want to talk to a lawyer, …and i said yes.
this is unbelievable.”
mr.
tomasone asked, “am i going to jail for this?” pc berezniy responded, “i have
told you a few times already.”  mr. tomasone said he was in shock and did not
know what was going on. pc berezniy told mr. tomasone that he knew he could not
be driving.  mr. tomasone replied that his worker and mechanic lived nearby.
at
8:07 p.m. mr. tomasone repeated that if pc berezniy wanted him to do the sobriety
test, he would do it, he said he did not want another charge. pc berezniy
responded that he had already offered it to him, and they went over it a few
times. mr. tomasone said he had just wanted to talk to someone before, call a
lawyer. when pc berezniy said he had already explained to him, he said he would
take the sobriety test.
he
said he had just wanted legal advice, that is all he wanted. he said pc
berezniy did not explain it to him in detail.  pc berezniy said it is straight
forward and that he knew he had previously done a test because he had a three-day
warning and a prior impaired driving conviction.   mr. tomasone repeated “i
will do it. i will do it. i just wanted to talk to a lawyer.”  he said, “you
asked me if i wanted to talk to lawyer before i do it and i said i did...you
said the number of a lawyer and asked if i wanted to talk to a lawyer, then you
said i could not call a lawyer.” mr. tomasone said he did not understand why pc
berezniy gave him the number for a lawyer, and then said he could not call a
lawyer.
pc
berezniy responded he had explained previously that he could not give him
privacy because the cruiser has audio and video recording and a conversation
with a lawyer is privileged and cannot be recorded. he explained he could not
shut off the recording. pc berezniy told mr. tomasone that he would be released
shortly and could speak to whoever he wanted after he was released.
at
8:10 p.m. mr. tomasone stated, “i don’t want this other charge, l will take the
test, i don’t care.”  pc berezniy told mr. tomasone that he smelled like
alcohol.
at
8:19 p.m. mr. tomasone said he wanted to speak to a lawyer and again stated
that he would do the test. he asked to be tested. at 8:20 p.m. mr. tomasone said,
“can i take the test at least?” and said, “can i take the test or not?”
when
pc berezniy began to provide mr. tomasone with the release documents, he told
him he was being charged with driving while prohibited and refusing to provide
a breath sample. mr. tomasone repeated that he was not refusing.
in his evidence, pc berezniy explained that when
mr. tomasone asked to do the asd test, he did not allow him to take the test
because he believed that mr. tomasone was avoiding it because he had been
drinking. he thought he was delaying so that his blood alcohol concentration
would be lower. he said in his experience people who have not consumed alcohol were
happy to take the test.  pc berezniy said he gave mr. tomasone the demand and gave
him the opportunity to provide the sample, and he refused and so he decided to
“go by that”.
in re-examination pc berezniy testified that had
mr. tomasone asked to provide the test immediately after he told him he was
being charged with refusal, at 7:52 p.m., he probably would have given him an
opportunity to do so.
pc berezniy released mr. tomasone at 8:23 p.m. on
an undertaking with an appearance notice.
during cross-examination mr. sahota asked pc
berezniy if he had considered muting the back microphone so mr. tomasone could
speak to counsel. pc berezniy responded that he did not know if the front
microphone would still pick up the conversation. pc berezniy agreed that he
would have allowed him to speak to a lawyer if he had a private place to
facilitate the conversation.
c.
position of the parties
although mr. tomasone filed applications
alleging that his rights under s. 8, 9, and s. 10(b) of the
charter
were
violated, during the trial the focus was on whether the essential elements of
the offence were proven by the crown beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
three primary issues
were:
i.)
whether there was a lawful demand under
s. 320.27(1)
of the
criminal code
. did pc berezniy have the requisite reasonable
suspicion to make the demand?
ii.)
whether the
actus reus
was established. was
there an unequivocal refusal?
iii.)
mens rea
. did the
crown prove that mr. tomasone intended to refuse to provide a sample.
mr. sahota for mr. tomasone submitted that the
crown failed to prove there was a lawful demand, and as a result mr. tomasone should
be found not guilty. pc berezniy testified he made the demand because he had a
reasonable suspicion that the accused had alcohol in his system. mr. sahota
submitted that pc berezniy’s grounds, mr. tomasone’s late turn on a red light,
and the fact that he was a prohibited driver due to a prior impaired driving
conviction, were insufficient to establish reasonable suspicion. he submitted
that the grounds amounted to a hunch, not reasonable suspicion, and as a result
the demand was not a lawful demand.
mr. sahota further submitted that there was not
an unequivocal refusal. the circumstances were confusing because pc berezniy
arrested mr. tomasone for driving while prohibited and read him the rights to
counsel and asked him if he wanted to call a lawyer “now”. however, when mr.
tomasone asked to call a lawyer, pc berezniy told him he could not speak to a
lawyer, and then demanded he provide a breath sample into an approved screening
device. mr. tomasone made several requests to speak to a lawyer, but within 10
or 11 minutes, mr. tomasone asked to provide a sample, but the officer would
not allow him to do so. the defence submits that under the circumstances there
was not an unequivocal refusal.
in response, mr. de chellis for the crown submitted
that the reasonable suspicion threshold is a low threshold, and pc berezniy had
the required reasonable suspicion based on the driving evidence and mr.
tomasone’s history.
mr. de chellis further submitted that mr.
tomasone unequivocally refused to provide a sample into the asd at
approximately 7:52 p.m. he submitted that the first genuine offer by mr.
tomasone to provide a sample was at 8:10:55 p.m. and that any pervious offers
to provide a sample were conditional on him being given an opportunity to speak
to a lawyer first.  mr. de chellis submits that the first genuine offer was 18
minutes and 28 seconds after the demand, and that the offer to provide the
sample was no longer part of the same transaction. he submitted that the
initial refusals between 7:48 p.m. and 7:52 p.m. were unequivocal and
intentional and as a result the crown had proven the allegations beyond a
reasonable doubt.
d.
summary of the law, analysis and
conclusions
the crown failed to establish the
actus reus of a criminal refusal
section 320.15(1)
of the
criminal code
states:
320.15(1)
everyone commits an offence who, knowing that a demand has been made, fails or
refuses to comply, without reasonable excuse, with a demand made under section
320.27 or 320.28.
to prove that an accused has “refused” to comply
with an approved screening device demand contrary to
s. 320.15(1)
, the
essential elements the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt are:
i.)
the police made a lawful demand under
s.
320.27(1)
or
(2)
of the
criminal code
;
ii.)
the accused “unequivocally refused” to comply
with the lawful demand;
iii.)
the accused possessed the necessary
mens rea
.
as in
khandakar
, this case
raises the issue of how long a person subjected to a roadside screening demand
has to change their mind about refusing to provide a breath sample before they
commit a criminal offence.
an initial refusal will not establish the
actus
reus
of the offence if the accused later agrees to provide a breath sample
as part of the “same transaction”.
in this case, the crown has failed to establish
that there was a criminal refusal beyond a reasonable doubt because mr.
tomasone’s offers to provide a breath sample, after his initial refusal, were
part of the same transaction.
section 327(1)(b) states:
320.27
(1)
if a peace officer has
reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has alcohol or a drug in their body
and that the person has, within the preceding three hours, operated a
conveyance, the peace officer may, by demand, require the person to comply with
the requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (b) in the case of
alcohol or with the requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (c) in
the case of a drug:
(b)
to
immediately
provide the
samples of breath that, in the peace officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable
a proper analysis to be made by means of an approved screening device and to
accompany the peace officer for that purpose;
in respect of the immediacy requirement,
subsequent to the supreme court of canada’s decision in
r. v. breault
,
2023 scc 9
, in
khandakar
, the ontario court of appeal explained as
follows at paras. 37 and 38:
section 320.27(1)(b)
expressly requires persons subjected to asd demands “
to immediately
provide…samples of [their] breath
”.
this requires them to “comply
immediately”, rather than when they see fit
.
r. v woods
,
2005 scc
42
, 2 s.c.r. 205, at para.
45
;
breault
,
at para.
31
. this
explicit statutory immediacy requirement also obliges the police to conduct
themselves in a way that makes immediate compliance by the subject possible.
among other things, they must have an asd immediately available when they make
the demand, and they must give the subject an immediate opportunity to blow
into the device, subject to the inherent “operational time” requirements of the
asd test and any delays caused by “unusual circumstances”:
breault
, at
paras.
32, 61-68
.
section 320.27
and its forerunners have also been interpreted as having a second implicit
immediacy requirement, under which officers must make an asd demand as soon as
they form “the reasonable suspicion that the driver has alcohol in his or her
body”:
r. v. peirman
;
r. v. dewald
(1994),
1994 canlii 1139 (on ca)
, 19 o.r. (3d) 704
(c.a.), at para.
5
. the existence of this second implied immediacy requirement
is linked to the implied limit on s. 10(b)
charter
rights that has been
read into the asd demand power and found to be a reasonable limit under s. 1:
see e.g.,
thomsen
…
[emphasis added].
however, “immediately does not mean
instantaneously”. there is some flexibility inherent in the word immediately.
section
320.27(1)
(b) allows some time for police to explain the asd test process and
the consequences of refusing, and police officers can give subjects some limited
opportunity to change their minds. the asd test process is a “series of
connected acts extending over a period of time”.
in approved screening device cases the “same
transaction” window is co-extensive with the maximum time the police have in
the circumstances to obtain a breath sample “immediately”. when someone
initially refuses to provide an asd breath sample, “the maximum time within
which they can change their mind cannot exceed the time within which a
compelled breath sample can lawfully be obtained by the police. this latter
time is determined by the operational requirements of the asd test process
and
by any “unusual circumstances” that extend the statutory “immediacy” window
”.
the operational time requirements include the time to explain to the accused
how to provide a sample and to operate the device to collect the sample.
consequently, in determining whether there was a
criminal refusal, a trial judge must consider whether an accused’s change of
mind occurred at a time when the police could have lawfully obtained a sample
having regard to both the operational time requirement to collect the sample “immediately”
and the presence of
any unusual circumstances
.
in this case there were unusual circumstances. because
mr. tomasone was arrested for driving while prohibited, pc berezniy informed
him of his right to counsel and asked him if he wanted to speak to a lawyer
“now”. he said he did.  however, immediately thereafter, pc berezniy initiated steps
to investigate mr. tomasone’s sobriety and issued an asd breath demand. the need
to implement the screening device demand immediately and the corresponding suspension
of the right to counsel during the sobriety investigation, after mr. tomasone
was read his rights to counsel and asked to speak to a lawyer, created
circumstances that were undoubtedly confusing to mr. tomasone and that extended
the statutory immediacy window.  to find otherwise, in my view would lead to
unfairness.
following his arrest at 7:45 p.m., pc berezniy
told mr. tomasone he would conduct a test to ensure he had not been drinking. immediately
following that, at 7:46 p.m. he was placed into the cruiser and pc berezniy read
him the rights to counsel and asked him if he wanted to speak to a lawyer
“now”. mr. tomasone indicated that he did. despite having just asked mr.
tomasone if he wanted to speak to a lawyer “now”, pc berezniy told mr. tomasone
he could not speak to a lawyer right away because he could not afford the
necessary privacy at the scene, and he would have to wait to speak to a lawyer
until he was released.
normally, after the provision of the rights to
counsel, if there is a necessary delay in the implementation of the rights to
counsel the police have a corresponding duty to hold off from gathering
evidence from the accused. not so, where the police are investigating a drinking
and driving offence, and the right to counsel is suspended.
as a result, immediately after reading the right
to counsel, pc berezniy, at 7:48 p.m. issued the approved screening device
demand. it is not surprising that in this circumstance, mr. tomasone asked to
speak to a lawyer before providing the sample. between 7:48 p.m. and 7:52 p.m.,
a period of four minutes, mr. tomasone continued to ask to speak to a lawyer
before providing the sample. pc berezniy did his best to explain to mr. tomasone
that he could not speak to counsel prior to providing the sample, he must
provide the sample immediately, and there were consequences should he refuse to
provide the sample.  after four minutes of back and forth, pc berezniy informed
mr. tomasone he was being charged for refusing and began to prepare the
paperwork to release mr. tomasone.
eight minutes later, at 8:00 p.m., mr. tomasone
told pc berezniy he was not refusing he just wanted to speak to a lawyer before
providing the sample. pc berezniy responded that it was too late, he had already
decided to charge him, and he would not be able to speak to a lawyer until
after he was released.
four minutes later, at 8:04 p.m., mr. tomasone began
asking to take the test and he continued to ask for an opportunity to take the
asd test until he was released. he was not given an opportunity to do so and
was charged. i find as a fact that between 8:04 and 8:10 p.m. mr. tomasone was
communicating that he did not want to refuse, and would take the test, even
though he wanted to speak to a lawyer first.
mr. tomasone was a layperson, not a lawyer. not
surprisingly, it was difficult for him to understand why he was told that he
could speak to a lawyer, but then denied the opportunity to do so immediately,
and asked to provide self-incriminatory evidence.  in these circumstances, his
change of mind within 12 to 18 minutes of being told he would be charged,
remained a part of the same transaction and fell within the immediacy
requirement.
in these circumstances, had the police obtained
a breath sample at 8:04 p.m. or 8:10 p.m., 12 to 18 minutes after the initial
demand, when mr. tomasone unconditionally offered to provide a sample, i am
satisfied the demand, if complied with, would have met the immediacy
requirement.
impaired driving is a serious offence that far
too often leads to loss of life and serious injury.  the police must be given
the necessary tools to investigate impaired driving and 80 plus offences
effectively and efficiently, and to prevent serious bodily harm and loss of
life. for that reason, when the police make approved screening device demands,
the right to counsel is suspended, and an accused must immediately provide a
sample.
however, serious consequences can flow from an
asd demand. a refusal is a criminal offence. if an accused person has a prior
conviction for impaired driving, as in this case, the accused faces the
potential of a mandatory minimum jail sentence. as a result, and as accepted in
khandakar
, and much earlier in
domik,
there must be some
flexibility to allow an accused to change his or her mind after an initial
refusal.
in this case, where the arrest for another
offence and provision of the rights to counsel lead to confusion about mr.
tomasone’s rights and obligations, the application of the immediacy component
must be interpreted in a way to prevent an unfair outcome. it is not surprising
that in this factual matrix mr. tomasone did not “instantaneously” agree to
comply. in these circumstances, it would not be “unreasonable for a lay person
or indeed anyone unskilled at criminal law at first to react negatively to an
invitation to give the police incriminating evidence.”
i find as a fact that after mr. tomasone’s
initial refusal, which was born in part from confusion, that after he had an opportunity
to think abut the circumstances, he agreed to provide a breath sample into the
asd, and this agreement was part of the same transaction as the initial
refusal.
notably, in
khandakar
the accused was
pulled over at 1:20 a.m. at 1:27 a.m. he was issued an asd demand under
s.
327(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
.
over a period of 13 minutes, between
1:27 a.m. and 1:40 a.m., the officer gave the accused multiple chances to blow
into the asd, but he repeatedly refused. he questioned whether the asd was
properly calibrated and, like in this case, asked to be arrested and taken to
the police station. the trial judge accepted the accused’s evidence that he
believed if he refused to provide an asd sample, he would be taken to the
police station where his breath could be analysed by a “real machine”, which he
believed would be more reliable. at 1:40 a.m. the officer asked him a final
time whether he would blow into the asd. when he refused, she arrested him.
approximately 10 minutes later, when he learned that he would be released from
the scene and would not have a chance to provide a sample at the police
station, he asked to blow, and the investigating officer told him it was too
late. following his release, the accused went to a police station and asked to
provide a breath sample, and when this request was refused, he went to a
hospital and unsuccessfully tried to have a blood sample taken.
the trial judge in
khandakar
acquitted
the accused on the basis that there was not an unequivocal refusal. the ontario
court of appeal found that the trial judge erred by not properly considering
whether the respondent’s offer to provide an initial sample after an initial
refusal fell within the time frame established by his statutory obligation to
provide a breath sample “immediately” and the summary conviction appeal judge
erred in law by treating the trial judge’s decision as a factual determination.
however, against this factual backdrop, even though 23 minutes passed between
the asd demand and the offer by the accused to provide a sample (a period at
least 5 minutes longer than in this case), the ontario court of appeal sent the
matter back for a new trial for the court to determine whether the immediacy
requirement was met. the court of appeal did not foreclose that a period of 23
minutes could fall within the immediacy requirement.
while falling towards the outer boundaries of
immediacy, i find that in the circumstances of this case mr. tomasone’s offer
to provide a sample remained a part of the same transaction and met the
immediacy requirement. as such, the crown has failed to establish the
actus
reus
of the offence.
failure to establish a lawful demand
under
section 320.27(1)
(b)
the defence also submitted that the crown failed
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that there was a lawful demand because pc berezniy
did not have the required reasonable suspicion that mr. tomasone had alcohol in
his body pursuant to
s. 320.27(1)
(b) and as a result the demand was not a
lawful demand.
before making a demand under
s. 320.27(1)
an
officer must reasonably suspect that a person who is operating a motor vehicle
(or has been in the previous three hours) has alcohol in his or her body, and
the belief must be objectively reasonable.
reasonable suspicion is a lower standard that
reasonable grounds to believe. it engages the reasonable possibility, rather
than probability of crime.
reasonable suspicion under
s. 320.27(1)
of the
criminal code
is based on
the reasonable possibility of alcohol in the body at the time of driving.
alternate explanations for indicia do not necessarily detract from that
possibility.
while in many instances an odour of alcohol will
be part of the constellation of circumstances leading to an officer forming a
reasonable suspicion that a person has alcohol in their body, odour of alcohol
is not a necessary precondition to making an approved screening device demand.
while unnecessary to my finding that mr.
tomasone is not guilty given my above conclusions about the refusal, i am also not
satisfied that pc berezniy had the requisite reasonable suspicion under
s.
320.27(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
. he testified that his reasonable
suspicion to make the demand was based on mr. tomasone’s history, he was a
prohibited driver due to a prior impaired driving conviction, and because of
his left turn on the red light, which he believed may be due to impairment. he
did not smell alcohol until after he had decided to charge mr. tomasone with a
refusal. while reasonable suspicion is a low threshold in this case the icc
recording showed that mr. tomasone was already partially in the intersection to
make the left turn when the light turned red, and he cleared the intersection
very shortly thereafter. when the officer turned on his emergency lights he
immediately responded, turned right, and pulled over.  i am not satisfied that
the nature of the driving supported an inference of possible impairment or the
presence of alcohol in mr. tomasone’s body even having regard to mr. tomasone’s
history. pc berezniy’s subjective determination that he had reasonable grounds
to suspect that mr. tomasone had alcohol in his body was not objectively
reasonable. as a result, the crown also failed to establish that there was a
lawful demand.
e.
conclusion
i am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that there was a criminal refusal, or a lawful demand. as a result, there is a
finding of not guilty.
released:  january 17, 2025
signed:
justice marcella henschel
as set out
in
r. v. khandakar
,
2024 onca 620
, at para.
19
, there is
disagreement in the case law about the mental element of the refusal offence: specifically,
over whether the crown must prove that the accused
intentionally
failed
or refused to provide a breath sample, or whether it is enough for the crown to
prove that the accused knew that their conduct would have this result.
r. v. khandakar
,
2024 onca 620
.
khandakar
,
at para.
1
.
khandakar
, at paras.
37 and 38
.
khandakar
,
at para.
33
.
khandakar
, at para.
2
.
in
r. v. thomsen
,
1988 canlii 73 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 640, the supreme court of canada held
the asd demand power implicitly suspends a detainee’s s. 10(b)
charter
rights in a manner that is justified under s. 1 of the
charter
.
khandakar
, at para.
45
citing
domik
, at para. 5
.
the potential for some degree of flexibility due to
the potential for unfairness has long been recognized. in
r
. v.
domik
,
(1979),
2 m.v.r. 301
,
1979 carswellont 12 (ont. h.c.)
, appeal dismissed
1980
carswellont 3879
, on summary conviction appeal, justice grange, at para. 5 of
his reasons stated:
section 235
is drastic legislation interfering with the usual rule against
self-incrimination. i do not think it unreasonable for a lay person or indeed
anyone unskilled in criminal law at first to react negatively to an invitation
to give the police incriminating evidence. i cannot imagine that parliament
intended to make such a refusal followed almost immediately by an assent,
criminal.
domik
,
was understood by lower courts, as establishing the principle that the refusal
offence is not committed when a person who initially refuses to provide a
breath sample later agrees to do so, provided that their later agreement and
the initial refusal forms part of a single transaction. in
khandakar
,
the ontario court of appeal found that the reasoning in
domik
applied to
asd demands even after the supreme court of canada’s decision in
breault
,
supra.
khandakar
, at para.
45
, citing
domik
at para. 5.
r.
v.
chehil
,
2013 scc 49
, at paras.
29 to 24
.
r. v. singh
,
o.j. no. 5133 (s.c.j.), at para. 12
.