ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. larios-bonilla
, 2025 oncj 161
date:
2025 03 20
court
file no.:  23-48100001
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
dylan
larios-bonilla
before
justice c. faria
submissions
heard on january 21, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on march 20, 2025
james frost......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alexandra mamo.........................
counsel  for the defendant dylan larios-bonilla
faria j.:
on august 27, 2024, after a trial, i found dylan
larios-bonilla guilty of sexual assault.
the matter was adjourned to prepare a pre-sentence report (psr). unfortunately,
though the report was received on november 7, 2024, there were two adjournments
required because of illness. sentencing submissions were heard on january 21,
2025. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts
on february 3, 2024, ea, a nursing home care
giver, was experiencing lower back pain. she went to mr. larios-bonilla, a
registered massage therapist, for a massage to manage her pain. during her
second massage with mr. larios-bonilla, while she laid face down on the massage
table, he removed the white sheet covering her, pulled her underwear between
her buttocks and then massaged her buttocks with both hands without her
consent.
ea heard what she thought was a belt buckle
noise and a zipper unzip. she turned around and saw mr. larios-bonilla’s belt
undone, his pant zipper down, and his hand in his boxers covering his penis.
she put on her clothes, confronted mr.
larios-bonilla, called the police and went straight to the police station to
report the sexual assault.
positions of the parties
the crown recommends a 90-day jail sentence, a 12-month
probation order, a dna order, and a sex offender information registration act “
soira”
order for 10 years.
the defence recommends a conditional sentence of
12 months, agrees with the crown’s probation and dna recommendations, but
disputes that a
soira
order is warranted.
mr. larios-bonilla
mr. larios-bonilla is a 32-year-old single man
with no criminal record.  pursuant to his psr, his parents divorced when he was
7 years old, and this had a negative impact on his life.  however, besides
this, he had a good childhood. he lives with his mother, has a girlfriend and maintains
positive relationships with those in his life.
he obtained a massage therapy diploma from a
local college and worked as a massage therapist from 2021 until this charge.
his licence is currently suspended. prior to that, he did general labour and
worked in a bakery. he is presently enrolled in an osteopathy program and hopes
to work in that sector after he graduates.
he reports no alcohol or substance issues, and
no physical or mental health conditions. this legal process, however, has
caused him stress and anxiety, and he now attends counselling weekly.
victim impact
the victim did not provide a victim impact
statement. however, her shock and surprise at what was done to her was evident in
the manner she testified. she testified she did not know why mr. larios-bonilla
was massaging her buttocks. she was confused but did not want to question him
and make him angry. she put her trust in his professionalism, and her trust was
violated.  when she realized she was being sexually assaulted, she screamed,
jumped up and got dressed as quickly as she could and fled the room.
the video of her exiting the massage therapy
room after the offence was particularly probative. although there was no audio,
her agitation was obvious.  her physical movements and gestures, alongside her
immediate attempt to alert the office staff in a distraught and upset manner
was clear.
by way of both her evidence at trial, and her behaviour
on the video, i find that ea was very disturbed by the sexual assault.
legal principles
section
718
of the
criminal code
provides that the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute to the respect of the law
and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society. to accomplish this, the
sanction i impose should have one or more of the following objectives:
•
to denounce unlawful conduct
•
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences
•
to separate offenders from society, where necessary
•
to assist in rehabilitating offenders
•
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the
community
•
to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders and
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
every
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender pursuant to s. 718.1.
it is well recognized that for sexual violence offences, denunciation
and deterrence are guiding principles.
the
principle of parity, s.718.2(b), that sentences for similar offences committed
by similar offenders in similar circumstances should be similar is applicable.
the principle of restraint, s.718.2(d) and (e) for first time offenders, is
also a consideration as stated in
r. v. priest
,
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
, o.j. no.
3369(c.a.) at paras.
543-44
.
r.
v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58
, notes that the “determination of a
just and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes
beyond a purely mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that
are difficult to define with precision.”
analysis
the issue is whether the appropriate sentence is
a jail term, or a conditional sentence order, and whether a
soira
order
is warranted in the circumstances.
the crown submits a conditional sentence is not
sufficient to reflect the objectives of denunciation and deterrence as required
for a sexual assault sentence. the defence submits the jurisprudence and
circumstances of this offence and this offender merit its consideration and is
the appropriate sentence.
aggravating factors
sexual assault is a serious offence. the two
principle aggravating features in this case are:
(i)
mr. larios-bonilla was acting in the capacity of
a health care provider when he touched ea sexually without her consent.
(ii)
the nature of massage placed ea in a vulnerable position.
she was almost nude, lying on a bed faced down and alone in a room with mr.
larios-bonilla. the context and location – that of medical assistance in a
clinic was intended to make her feel safe, but was the location of her
violation instead.
an offence committed by a health care
professional in this environment attracts the applicability of s. 718.2(a)(iii),
that is a breach of trust and constitutes a statutorily aggravating factor.
mitigating factors
in mitigation:
(i)
mr. larios-bonilla is a first offender, with no
criminal record.
(ii)
he is also otherwise pro-social, pursuing
further education and maintaining consistent employment.
(iii)
he has significant family, community, and
professional support. i received 12 letters of support from people who know mr.
larios-bonilla. his close family characterize him as considerate, giving, and
kind. his friends describe him as loyal, helpful, and hardworking. his
professional colleagues describe him as talented, committed, and generous with
his knowledge.
(iv)
he is taking counselling and is amenable to
counselling.
these antecedents reflect good rehabilitative prospects,
and warrant the application of restraint.
in addition, mr. larios-bonilla has experienced
the collateral consequence of having his massage therapy licence suspended because
of these charges, and has lost his job,
r. v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
at
para.
48
.
mr. larios-bonilla had a trial and elected not
to speak to the psr author about the offence, as he is entitled to do. i thus
have no information about mr. larios-bonilla’s insight into the offence. the
absence of this information is neutral.
caselaw
the crown referred me to 5 cases in support of a
custodial disposition:
r. v. al-handani
,
2024 oncj 314
,
r. v
.
khan
,
2016 oncj 282
,
r. v. m.l.
,
2018 onsc 7355
(s.c.a.),
r. v.
vignon-campuzano
,
2020 onsc 5702
, and
r. v. zolman
,
o.j. 16
.
all 5 offenders were in similar health care provider
roles. all 5 were sentenced to custodial dispositions ranging from 90 days
intermittent jail to 13 months in jail.
one case,
zolman
was appealed, and a new
trial ordered, and
vigon-campuzano
and
m.l.
involved digital
penetration.  the more similar cases are those of
al-handani
and
khan
.
mr. al-handamani, was training to be an rmt
(registered massage therapist) who removed his patient’s underwear, placed his
hands on her breasts, including her nipples, and touched her vagina. he was
also a first-time offender, who had family support, but was no longer able to work
in the field and was sentenced after trial. he received a 90-day intermittent
sentence.
mr. khan was an unlicensed rmt who held himself
to be one. he touched the patient’s breasts and vaginal area repeatedly after
being told “no”. he was a first time offender who was sentenced after trial to
6 months custody.
although the level of physical intrusion is not
necessarily indicative, nor determinative of the gravity of the offence,
nonetheless, the facts in each of these cases are more serious than the facts before
me.
counsel for mr. larios-bonilla provided 8 cases supporting
her recommendation for a conditional sentence:
r.
v. browne
,
2021 onsc 6097
,
r. v. g.t.,
2022 onsc 2619
,
r. v.
holland
,
2022 onsc 1540
,
r. v. morgan,
2021 oncj 100
,
r. v. r.s.,
2021 oncj 2263
,
r. v. francis
, oncj 2023
unreported
,
r. v.
buna
,
2010 bcca 53
,
r. v. dickson
,
2023 onsc 2776
.
in each of these cases, the sexual violation was
also more invasive than the case at bar, and in some cases, the offender had a
more troubled history than that of mr. larios-bonilla,
but nonetheless the offenders were sentenced to conditional sentences.
the most similar case is that of
r. v. buna
.
mr. buna, a chiropractor was found guilty of 5 counts of sexual assault on his
patients. three of the counts were upheld on appeal. the violations pertained
to touching his patients’ breasts and buttocks during treatment. the bc court
of appeal noted at para. 11 that though the conditional sentence of 9 months
was on the low end of the range when compared to similar cases, it was a fit
sentence.
conditional sentence determination
the first question is to determine whether a conditional sentence
is available pursuant to
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code
.  the test as
articulated by the supreme court in
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
, 2000 s.c.c. 5 at
paragraph
77
states:
once
a sentencing judge has found the offender guilty of an offence for which there
is no minimum term of imprisonment, has rejected both a probationary sentence
and a penitentiary term as inappropriate, and is satisfied that the offender
would not endanger the community, the judge must then consider whether a
conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing set out in
sections 718
to 718.2
the crown elected to proceed summarily and there is no minimum
term of custody required for this offence.  the gravity of the offence renders
time served, or a suspended sentence inappropriate.  the circumstances,
however, also do not warrant a penitentiary sentence and the crown does not
recommend one. mr. larios-bonilla has no criminal record and
has abided by the terms of his release with no difficulty. i find that he would
not put the community in danger.
the issue is whether a conditional sentence is
consistent with the fundamental principles of sentencing in this case,
specifically, denunciation and deterrence.
a conditional sentence can have a denunciatory
and deterrent effect as the supreme court of canada stated in
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5
at para.
22
:
the
conditional sentence incorporates some elements of non-custodial measures and
some others of incarceration.  because it is served in the community, it will
generally be more effective than incarceration at achieving the restorative
objectives of rehabilitation, reparations to the victim and community, and the
promotion of a sense of responsibility in the offender.  however,
it
is
also a punitive sanction capable of achieving the objectives of denunciation
and deterrence
. (underlined in the original)
lamer c.j. underscored the serving of a sentence
in one’s community and added at para. 102:
incarceration will usually provide
more denunciation than a conditional
sentence, as a conditional
sentence is generally a more lenient sentence
than a jail term of equivalent
duration.
that said, a conditional sentence can
still provide a significant
amount of denunciation. this is particularly so
when onerous conditions are
imposed and the duration of the conditional
sentence is extended beyond the
duration of the jail sentence that would
ordinarily have been imposed in
the circumstances.( emphasis mine)
in addition, the appropriate duration of a conditional sentence
will often differ from the appropriate duration of a sentence served in a
custodial facility,
proulx
at
para.
52
.
in particular, the supreme court of canada in
proulx
states
at para
114
:
…a conditional sentence may provide sufficient denunciation
and deterrence, even in cases in which restorative objectives are of diminished
importance, depending on the nature of the conditions imposed, the duration of
the conditional sentence, and the circumstances of the offender and the
community in which the conditional sentence is to be served.
mr. larios-bonilla is a young man with no
criminal record, strong family, and community support, who has demonstrated
efforts to improve himself academically, professionally, and personally by
going to counselling. he committed a serious offence that warrants a
substantial sanction. given his circumstances, a lengthy and strict conditional
sentence is a substantial sanction.
moreover, a conditional sentence comes with the
“real threat of incarceration to increase compliance with the conditions of the
sentence”,
proulx
, para.
21
, should mr. larios-bonilla be found to
breach one of the conditions.
the supreme court stated in
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
11
:
this court has on many occasions noted the importance of
giving wide latitude to sentencing judges. since they have,
inter alia
,
the advantage of having heard and seen the witnesses, sentencing judges are in
the best position to determine, having regard to the circumstances, a just and
appropriate sentence that is consistent with the objectives and principles set
out in the
criminal
code
in this regard.
a sentencing judge must balance and weigh all
relevant factors. a fit sentence is a reflection of the facts, the role of the
offence in the community, the jurisprudence, and the uniqueness of the
individual before the court.
in this case, and with this offender, i find
that a lengthy and strict conditional sentence will reflect denunciation and
deterrence as required for a sanction for a sexual assault of this nature and
is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing
set out in
sections 718
to 718.2.
soira determination
sexual assault is a primary designated offence
for a
soira
order. pursuant to s.490.012 (3) i am to make a
soira
order “unless the court is satisfied the person has established that:
(a)
there would be no connection between making the
order and the purpose of helping police services prevent or investigate crimes
of a sexual nature by requiring the registration of information relating to sex
offenders under that
act
; or
(b)
the impact of the order on the person, including
on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public
interest in protecting society through the effective prevention or
investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration
of information relating to sex offenders under that
act
.
the factors i am to consider per 490.012(4) are:
(a)
the nature and seriousness of the designated
offence;
(b)
the victim’s age and other personal
characteristics;
(c)
the nature and circumstances of the relationship
between the person ad the victim;
(d)
the personal characteristics and circumstances
of the person;
(e)
the person’s criminal history, including the age
at which they previously committed any offence and the length of time for which
they have been at liberty without committing an offence;
(f)
the opinions of experts who have examined the
person; and
(g)
any other factors that the court considers
relevant.
the crown submits that a
soira
order is
necessary to protect the public.
the defence submits a
soira
order is
grossly disproportionate due to the invasive and exhaustive nature of the
process, and notes that the invasive nature of the process outweighs the public
interest. she further submits that the order would be substantial on mr.
larios-bonilla. she points to his rehabilitative prospects as making it unlikely
mr. larios-bonilla will re-offend.
i have no evidence of mr. larios-bonilla’s risk
to re-offend. although he is a first-time offender, this is insufficient to
infer his risk level, and i thus do not accept counsel’s submission on this
point.
although i agree he has positive rehabilitative
prospects, but again i have no evidence of his understanding or insight into
his offending, and therefore, again, do not accept counsel’s submission that
mr. larios-bonilla’s rehabilitative potential mitigates his risk to re-offend.
finally, given that mr. larios-bonilla is
pursuing a career that is in the broad health care field, and intends on
dealing with the public in that capacity, the public interest in monitoring mr.
larios-bonilla is high.
considering the factors per s. 490.012(4), in
that this is a serious sexual assault, the victim was in a vulnerable
relationship with mr. larios-bonilla as his patient, and he breached that trust
as a health care provider, i find that the defence has not satisfied me that
mr. larios-bonilla should be exempt from complying with a
soira
order.
sentence
mr. larios-bonilla, i sentence you to a 15-month
conditional sentence and a 2- year probation. the conditional sentence will be
a strict one, the terms for which will be appended to this decision, as will
the terms for probation.
i will make a dna order that a sample be
provided today in this courthouse.
i will also make a
soira
order for 10
years.
released:  march
20, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria
appendix a: 15-month conditional sentence
1.
report in person within 24 hours to a supervisor and thereafter, at all
times and places as directed by the supervisor or any person authorized by a
supervisor.
2.
do not change your place of residence without first obtaining the
written permission of your supervisor.
3.
you will be confined to the property of your residence for the first 12
months of conditional sentence order. you will remain on that property all times
except
(a)
between 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m. on saturdays in order to acquire the
necessities of life, or another 5 hour period on another day of the week, as
pre-approved by the supervisor.
(b)
for any medical emergencies involving any member of your immediate family (spouse, child, parent, sibling).
(c)
for going directly to and from or being at school,
employment, court attendances, religious services and legal or medical or
dental appointments.
(d)
for going directly to or from and being at assessment,
treatment or counselling session
(e)
you will confirm your schedule in advance with the
supervisor setting out the times for these activities
(f)
with the prior written approval of the supervisor.  the
written approval is to be carried with you during these times.
(g)
for carrying out any legal obligations regarding
compliance with this conditional sentence order
(h)
you must present yourself at your doorway upon the
request of your supervisor or a peace officer for the purpose of verifying your
compliance with your home confinement condition.
4.
following your home confinement, the balance of your order you will
remain in your residence from 11:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. except:
(a)
for any medical emergency involving you or any member
of your immediate family (spouse, child, parent, sibling).
(b)
you must provide written justification to the
supervisor within 72 hours of any such absence during your curfew hours
(c)
for any hospital visit or funeral attendance.  you must
provide written justification to the supervisor prior to any such absence
during your curfew hours.
(d)
unless you are in the direct company of mother, your
girlfriend, or family member (including uncle, aunt, cousin)
(e)
travelling directly to, from and while at work or
school
(f)
with the prior written permission of your supervisor
5.
have no contact directly or indirectly with ea.
6.
attend and actively participate in all assessment,
counselling and rehabilitative programs as directed by the supervisor and
complete them to the satisfaction of the supervisor, including, but not limited
to
a)
sexual boundaries
b)
sexual
behaviours
c)
sexual psychiatric or psychological issues
d)
stress management.
7.
you shall sign any release of information forms as will
enable your supervisor to monitor your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling and rehabilitative programs as directed.
8.
you shall provide proof of your attendance and
completion of any assessments, counselling and rehabilitative programs as
directed.
9.
not obtain any firearms licence, registration or
certificate.
10.
do not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal
code
.
appendix b:  2 year probation terms
the terms of probation are:
1.
report within 24 hours after the completion of your cso and
thereafter as required.
2.
have no contact with ea.
3.
attend and participate in assessment, counselling and rehabilitative
programs as directed by the probation officer, in particular attend assessment
for sexual behaviours, and take counselling for sexual boundaries.
4.
sign releases to ensure the probation officer can monitor attendance
and completion of programs.
5.
possess no weapons as defined by the
criminal code
.
6.
not obtain any firearms licence, registration, or certificate.
r. v. larios-bonilla
,
2024 oncj 410