ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. quinless
, 2025 oncj 94
date:  2025 02 11
court file no.:  brampton
– central west 23-31109507
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
rajiv quinless
ruling on
charter
application
before justice a. neil
singh
heard on january 23-24,
2025
reasons for judgment
released on february 11, 2025
lawrence eikelboom.................................................... counsel
for the crown/respondent
tarinpal dhaliwal........................................... for
the defendant/applicant rajiv quinless
table of contents
introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………1
factual background…………………………………………………………………………………………2
discussion…………………………………………………………………………………………………………3
issue #1 - there is no s.8 & 9 breach. pc mitton was
permitted to rely on the asd results……………….…….3
issue #2 -
there is no s.10(a)
breach. the applicant was properly informed of the reasons for his arrest
….…...4
issue #3 - there was no s.10(b) charter from any delay in
reading mr. quinless his right to counsel…………5
issue #4
- there is a s.10(b) breach from mr. quinless
being impermissibly steered to duty counsel…….……..6
issue #5 - there is a breach of mr. quinless’ right to
consult privately with counsel…………………………….8
issue #6 - the evidence must be excluded to maintain
confidence in the administration of justice…………….9
conclusion………………………………………………………………………………………………………12
singh j.:
introduction
rajiv
quinless is charged with having an excess blood alcohol concentration within
two hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance on august 23, 2023. the defence conceded
that the crown has proven its case against mr. quinless subject to this court’s
rulings on the admissibility of his breath readings and utterances made to the
police.
the
defence argued that mr. quinless’ breath readings and utterances should be
excluded because of a series of alleged
charter
breaches that occurred
after he was initially detained. additionally, the defence contests the
voluntariness of mr. quinless’ utterances to the police.
unsurprisingly,
the crown asserts there were no
charter
breaches. mr. quinless’
utterances were voluntary. there is no basis for the exclusion of any evidence.
alternatively, if there are any
charter
breaches, a s.24(2) analysis would
demand the inclusion of the evidence. mr. quinless should therefore be found
guilty of the charge before the court.
i
find that that there have been numerous breaches of mr. quinless’ right to counsel.
the interests of justice, including the long-term repute of the administration
of justice requires that i exclude the evidence. mr. quinless will be found not
guilty.
these
are my reasons.
factual
background
on
august 23, 2023, the peel regional police service were contacted by mr.
quinless’ ex-girlfriend who believed he was driving under the influence of
alcohol. the complainant advised that mr. quinless was driving a black ford
f-150. she also provided a home address for mr. quinless. the police attended.
when
police arrived at around 1:00 a.m., mr. quinless was located outside his
vehicle. pc mitton cautioned mr. quinless that he was under investigation for
impaired driving. when asked, mr. quinless confirmed he had been drinking earlier
in the evening at a banquet hall. pc mitton, went back to her cruiser, returned
with an approved screening device (asd), and made demand that mr. quinless
provide a sample into the asd. he failed.
at
1:03 a.m., mr. quinless was arrested for “impaired driving.” at no point during
his interactions with pcs mitton and dickinson was mr. quinless advised he was
under arrest for an “80 plus” or “excess blood alcohol” charge.
pc
dickinson immediately brought mr. quinless to his cruiser, searched him
incident to arrest and put him in the back of the vehicle. he obtained his
notes, got into his vehicle, and started reading mr. quinless his rights to
counsel at 1:07 a.m. he followed immediately after with a police caution and
breath demand.
mr.
quinless understood everything communicated to him. he initially declined the
opportunity to speak to a lawyer. he did, however, change his mind when he was
being booked into cells at 22 division.
after
speaking to duty counsel, mr. quinless was turned over to pc marc purdy, a
qualified technician who administered the approved instrument breath tests. mr.
quinless provided two suitable samples into an approved instrument that
registered truncated readings of 170 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood.
discussion
the
issues i need to determine with respect to the alleged charter breaches are as
follows:
(1)
did
pc mitton impermissibly rely on the asd test results leading to breaches of ss.
8 and 9 of the
charter?
(2)
was
there a violation of mr. quinless’ s.10(a) right to be informed of the reason
for his arrest when he was told he was under arrest for “impaired driving”
instead of “excess blood alcohol”?
(3)
was
there a violation of mr. quinless’ s.10(b) right to counsel when he was
informed of his right approximately 4 minutes after his arrest at 1:07 a.m.?
(4)
was
mr. quinless impermissibly “steered” to duty counsel by the cells’ officer at
22 division?
(5)
was
mr. quinless denied the opportunity to consult with counsel in private contrary
to his right under s.10(b) of the
charter
?
(6)
if
there are any
charter
breaches, should the evidence be excluded pursuant
to an analysis under s.24(2) of the
charter?
issue
#1 – there is no s.8 & 9 breach. pc mitton was permitted to rely on the asd
results
the argument
the
defence argues that because mr. quinless had recently smoked and consumed food,
the reliability of the asd was called into question. pc mitton could therefore not
rely upon them as accurate and did not have reasonable and probable grounds
(rpg) for the arrest and subsequent breath demand. the defence asserts that this
results in breaches of ss.8 and 9 of the
charter
.
the
crown position is that pc mitton was entitled to rely upon the asd results. the
asd test provided rpg for an arrest and the subsequent breath demand. there is
no breach of ss. 8 and 9 of the
charter.
analysis
pc
mitton had an asd with her. she tested it at the start of her shift. the result
of her self-test was appropriate. when she inspected the asd, pc mitton
confirmed the asd was within its calibration window. it was pc mitton’s
evidence that the asd would not accept a sample if it were outside of its
appropriate calibration window. at the start of the testing procedure, she
again conducted a self-test and received an appropriate result. she did not
receive any error messages from the asd on that day prior to mr. quinless’
test. she was satisfied the asd was functioning properly.
there
are numerous factors that might call into question the reliability of an asd
test result. the police, however, are not constitutionally obligated to
eliminate all potential issues that may affect an asd’s reliability. the
failure to do so does not, in and of itself, deprive the officer of reasonable
grounds based on an asd fail. the analysis is case-specific.
pc
mitton did not observe any evidence of mr. quinless having recently consumed
food, nor did she observe anything to suggest he had been recently smoking. i
note that she did not detect the odour of cigarette smoke on mr. quinless.
although
mr. quinless testified that he had smoked in his vehicle on the way home and
that he was eating, the timing of his food consumption and smoking are unclear.
he also never vocalized these things to the officer. while mr. quinless was not
obligated to say anything, there was nothing in the circumstances to suggest pc
mitton knew or ought to have known that he had recently smoked or eaten food.
she was satisfied that the asd was in proper working order, that the circumstances
permitted her to receive a suitable sample from mr. quinless, and that any
sample could be relied upon as accurate.
in
these circumstances, pc mitton was entitled to rely on the asd results for her
rpg to arrest mr. quinless. there is no
charter
breach. the applicant’s
claim regarding the asd’s reliability is dismissed.
issue
#2 – there is no s.10(a) breach. the applicant was properly informed of the
reasons for his arrest
the argument
the
applicant submits a breach of his s.10(a)
charter
right when he was
advised that he was under arrest for “impaired driving” instead of an “excess
blood alcohol” charge.
the
respondent submits that there is no functional difference between the charges. being
advised of “impaired driving” was sufficient information for mr. quinless to
understand the reason for his detention and his jeopardy.
analysis
there
is no question the officers advised mr. quinless of the wrong charge wording.
they did, however, make it clear that he was under arrest for a drinking and
driving offence.
section
10(a) of the
charter
does not require the detainee to be advised of the
specific charge wording. a person will be properly advised of the reason for
their detention if they are given information that is sufficiently clear and
simple to enable them to understand the reason for their detention and the
extent of their jeopardy. the issue is whether
what the accused was
told, viewed reasonably in all the circumstances, was sufficient to permit [them]
to make a reasonable decision to decline or submit to arrest,” or in the
alternative, to meaningfully exercise the right to counsel under s. 10(b).
in
my view, there was no breach of s.10(a) here. substance trumps form. mr.
quinless was given sufficient information, in basic language, to understand why
he was under arrest. the specific charge wording was not required. the
information provided by the police was more than enough to meet the concerns
section 10(a) of the
charter
seeks to address.
an
arrest for the wrong offence (“80 plus” or “impaired” as the case may be) does
not invalidate a breath demand where the requisite grounds exist. it has also
been found that it does not constitute an arbitrary arrest or detention under
s.9.
logic
would dictate that there would be no s.10(a)
charter
breach in those
circumstances either. mr. quinless was aware he was under arrest for a drinking
and driving offence. the officer clearly had the grounds to make a breath
demand pursuant to s.320.28(1) which covers both the “impaired” and “80 plus”
offences. given the significant overlap between the “impaired” and “80 plus”
offences, mr. quinless was adequately advised of the reasons for his arrest.
there
is no breach of section 10(a) of the
charter
. the applicant’s claim, in
this regard, is dismissed.
issue
#3 – there was no s.10(b) charter breach from any delay in reading mr. quinless
his right to counsel.
the argument
mr.
quinless argues that there was an impermissible delay in the police providing
him with his rights to counsel upon arrest. since there were no pressing safety
concerns, the police were not permitted to delay providing mr. quinless with
the informational component of his right to counsel. it should have been done
immediately.
the
crown argues that mr. quinless was read his rights to counsel immediately
within the requirements of the law. mr. quinless was arrested and searched
incident to arrest. he was then read his rights to counsel. searching mr.
quinless was an appropriate police action that justified the very brief delay
in providing him with his rights to counsel.
analysis
mr.
quinless was arrested at 1:03 a.m. he was immediately handcuffed to his rear by
pc dickinson and walked to the rear of his cruiser. he searched him incident to
arrest at 1:04 a.m. as the search was ending, pc mitton asked mr. quinless if
there was anything he wanted from his vehicle as it was going to be towed. this
took mere seconds and did not impede pc dickinson in any meaningful way. mr.
quinless was placed into the rear of pc dickinson’s cruiser at 1:05 a.m. pc
dickinson obtained his impaired driving investigation notes from the front
passenger seat of his cruiser. he made his way to the driver’s seat, stopping
only momentarily to receive mr. quinless’ keys from pc mitton. at 1:07 a.m., pc
dickinson commenced reading mr. quinless’ his rights to counsel.
rights
to counsel are to be provided to arrested persons immediately upon arrest. this
requirement is not absolute but is subject to concerns for officer or public safety.
mr.
quinless was arrested, searched incident to arrest, and read his rights to
counsel in very short order. there was no meaningful delay in mr. quinless
receiving his rights to counsel. the officers were permitted to search him
incident to arrest. although he was very polite and extremely compliant, the
officers did not know mr. quinless and had never dealt with him before. pc
dickinson’s limited safety concerns were valid and justifiable in the
circumstances.
any
delay that occurred did not result in a breach of mr. quinless’ s.10(b)
charter
right.
issue
#4 – there is a s.10(b) breach from mr. quinless being impermissibly steered to
duty counsel
the argument
mr.
quinless argues that he was impermissibly steered to duty counsel. mr. quinless
requested to speak to his brother to get help in securing counsel. the cells’
officer however, steered him to duty counsel instead of accommodating his
request. in doing so, mr. quinless was subject to a breach of his s.10(b)
charter
right.
the
respondent submits that there is no breach in this regard. mr. quinless
accepted duty counsel and spoke to them. he never expressed any dissatisfaction
with his call to duty counsel. he never requested access to a lawyer list or an
internet search to find counsel. in addition, it is unclear what mr. quinless
said to the cells’ officer and whether his request to call his brother was
understood as relating to his wish to access counsel.
analysis
mr.
quinless provided unchallenged evidence regarding his access to counsel at the
station. he advised that during conversation with the cells’ officer (who
remains unknown), he asked to speak to his brother. mr. quinless testified that
he did so because his brother graduated from a university program where many of
his professors were counsel, and he would be able to assist him in retaining a
lawyer.
in
fairness, however, mr. quinless could not confirm what specifically he
articulated to the cells’ officer. to the best of his recollection, he told the
officer that he wanted to contact his brother to get some advise on how to move
forward with this. ultimately, he was unsure of what he said to the officer specifically.
mr.
quinless’ evidence was that the cells’ officer responded that they could get
him out of custody quicker if he went with duty counsel. the cells’ officer
advised him that most lawyers’ offices would be closed at that late hour
, but duty counsel was available
24/7 and they could get him on the phone with them sooner, thus reducing his
time in custody. logically, mr. quinless’ felt that if he went with duty
counsel, he could get out of there quicker. mr. quinless agreed and went with duty
counsel.
i
accept mr. quinless’ evidence. i believe him. mr. quinless was consistent and
unshaken in cross-examination. he was fair in his evidence. an example of mr.
quinless fairness was evident when he conceded he did not remember exactly what
he told the cells’ officer about contacting his brother. he made admissions
against his interest as well. for instance, he admitted during the
voir dire
that he was in fact driving the vehicle, when he was found outside of it, and
no one could definitively place him behind the wheel. this admission and his
fair testimony enhances his credibility.
i
find that the cells’ officer impermissibly steered mr. quinless to duty
counsel. although mr. quinless’ conceded that he did not know exactly what was
said between himself and the cells’ officer, i find that the conversation was
about accessing counsel. otherwise, why would the cells’ officer tell mr.
quinless that they could get him out of custody sooner if he went with duty
counsel? the context of the conversation must have concerned counsel to garner such
a response from the officer.  that is the only logical conclusion from the flow
of their conversation.
mr.
quinless sought to exercise his right to counsel of choice through a third
party who he felt would assist him in securing counsel. our law permits this
. rather than implement his
request, the cells’ officer undermined mr. quinless’ choice. in doing so, the
cells’ officer made duty counsel the obvious option when he tied the right to
counsel to mr. quinless’ ongoing deprivation of liberty.
suggesting
duty counsel to mr. quinless was impermissible for two reasons. first, mr.
quinless was trying to contact his brother to assist him in securing counsel.
as stated above, the officer must have understood this given his subsequent suggestion
to go with duty counsel. by not calling his brother, the cells’ officer failed
in his implementation duty of mr. quinless’ right to counsel. secondly, the
cells’ officer tied mr. quinless exercise of his right to counsel to his s.7
liberty interests. mr. quinless was faced with a choice: extend his time in
custody to access counsel of choice or get out of jail quicker with 24/7 duty
counsel. in doing so, the cells’ officers funneled mr. quinless to duty counsel.
this
is not a situation where mr. quinless tried to reach his brother, or counsel,
and after a reasonable amount of time was offered duty counsel and accepted. no
initial call was made. the exercise of mr. quinless’ choice of counsel was
linked to his ongoing incarceration. he was told he could get out of jail
quicker if he went with duty counsel.
mr.
quinless’ was denied a call to access counsel of choice. he was then steered to
duty counsel through an inducement related to his liberty. the result is a
clear breach of his s.10(b)
charter
right.
issue
#5 – there is a breach of mr. quinless’ right to consult privately with counsel
the argument
mr.
quinless argues he was denied a meaningful opportunity to speak to counsel in
private. he believed the counsel room was being audio and video recorded. in
addition, the door to the counsel room was ajar. the fact that mr. quinless
felt that he was not speaking to counsel in private, regardless of whether this
was the case, is a breach of his right to counsel.
the
crown counters that mr. quinless was not actually audio recorded and there was
no evidence he was overheard. further, mr. quinless confirmed in the breath
room he had spoken to duty counsel, and the conversation was completely private.
mr. quinless did not raise any concerns about his consultation with duty
counsel to pc purdy.
analysis
when
mr. quinless first arrived at 22 division, he testified that he was told that
the entire area was audio and video recorded. mr. quinless stated he was never advised
the counsel room where he consulted with duty counsel was not audio recorded.
mr. quinless testified that while speaking to duty counsel the door to the room
was ajar. he did not feel that he had any privacy when consulting with counsel.
on
the other hand, when he entered the breath room, the following exchange took
place between pc purdy and mr. quinless:
pc purdy:
so, i do have
the understanding that you did
have to
speak to duty counsel,
correct?
rajiv quinless:
yes sir.
pc purdy:
and that
conversation you had with that duty counsel there
is totally
private, ok?
rajiv quinless:
yes sir.
pc purdy:
did you
understand the advice that that lawyer gave you?
rajiv quinless:
yes sir.
pc purdy:
are you
satisfied with that advice?
rajiv quinless:
yes sir.
the
applicant bears the onus of establishing a breach of his right to consult with
counsel in privacy. in cases where there is no actual invasion of privacy,
there may still be a s.10(b) breach where the applicant establishes they
believed they could not retain and instruct counsel in private, and that this belief
was reasonably held in the circumstances
.
mr.
quinless has met his burden. i accept the applicant’s testimony that he was
told that everything in the station was being audio and video recorded. no one
told him that the counsel room was not being audio recorded. the record
establishes that the counsel room was video recorded. mr. quinless believed he
was not afforded privacy due to the audio/video recording and the counsel room
door being ajar.
mr.
quinless was consistent and unshaken in cross-examination. his evidence in this
area was unchallenged, and in the absence of evidence that he was advised the
counsel room was not being recorded, his belief that he was not speaking privately
with counsel is entirely reasonable.
i
have reviewed the breath room video several times. i am satisfied that pc purdy
was not asking mr. quinless if his conversation with duty counsel was in
private, but rather, he was telling him that it was. pc purdy said that the
conversation with duty counsel was “totally private, ok?” mr. quinless’
response, “yes sir” can, at best, be seen as the applicant’s acknowledgment of
pc purdy’s previous statement. in coming to this conclusion, i reject the
respondent’s submission that mr. quinless confirmed that he knew he was
speaking to counsel in private. unfortunately, by that point in time, mr.
quinless had already consulted with counsel in a manner he felt did not afford
him privacy.
the
defence has established a breach of s.10(b) of mr. quinless right to consult
privately with counsel.
issue
#6 – the evidence (breath readings and utterances) must be excluded to maintain
confidence in the administration of justice.
having
found multiple breaches of mr. quinless’ right to counsel, i now assess whether
the evidence at issue (mr. quinless breath readings and utterances) ought to be
excluded from evidence.
section
24(2) is focused on maintaining the long-term integrity of, and public
confidence in, the justice system. in addressing this goal, the s.24(2)
analysis is focused on three lines of inquiry.
1.
the seriousness of the charter-infringing conduct
this
line of inquiry focuses on the state conduct. the conduct can range from
unintentional minor violations to willful or reckless disregard for
charter
rights. the more serious the state misconduct, the greater the need for the
court to disassociate itself from it
.
the
steering of mr. quinless to duty counsel is a very serious breach. the police
ignored mr. quinless request to call his brother so that he could try to access
counsel. instead, they induced him to engage with duty counsel. in doing so,
the officer engaged mr. quinless’ liberty interests. mr. quinless was left to
choose between exercising his right to counsel as he wished and his liberty. this
complete departure from long settled
charter
standards cannot be
considered good faith. at its highest, it is a reckless disregard for the
charter
.
this behaviour would undermine public confidence in the rule of law, and risk
bringing the administration of justice into disrepute.
the
privacy breach is only moderately serious. there is no evidence that mr.
quinless’ consultation was overheard or that he was otherwise not provided with
adequate privacy to consult with counsel. he was simply left with the
reasonable impression that his call with counsel was not in private. there is
no evidence to find that this was done purposefully. on the contrary, this
appears to be the result of police inadvertence more than anything else.
due
to the seriousness of the conduct regarding accessing counsel of choice and the
subsequent steering to duty counsel, this line of inquiry strongly favours
exclusion.
2.
the impact of the breach on the charter-protected interests of the accused
the
impact of the breach on mr. quinless was significant. the right to counsel is a
lifeline for the detained. it is essential in providing support and advice on
several issues, including the right against self-incrimination.
i also note that the limited
scope of legal advice in impaired driving cases does not mitigate the
seriousness of a breach on a s.24(2) analysis.
immediately
after the
charter
breaches, mr. quinless provided breath samples and
made inculpatory utterances. he was denied the opportunity to access his
lifeline through his brother. he was also induced to speak with duty counsel with
his ongoing incarceration hanging over his head. finally, he reasonably felt as
though he was unable to consult with counsel in private.
at
the same time, i recognize that the breath testing procedure is minimally
intrusive. i also note that had mr. quinless been permitted to speak to his
brother, and then counsel of choice privately, he would have inevitably
provided the breath samples. i cannot say the same for his utterances however,
given mr. quinless’ belief that he was not afforded privacy in speaking with
counsel.
what
troubles me though, is the police connecting mr. quinless’ exercise of his
right to counsel to his liberty. mr. quinless was wrongly induced to opt for
duty counsel instead of his first choice. the impact of this breach on his
charter-
protected
interests was significant.
the
more serious the incursion is, the greater the case is for exclusion to avoid
the public perceiving individual charter rights as merely second-class or
unimportant constitutional protections – a situation that would negatively
impact the long-term repute of the administration of justice.
this
line of inquiry therefore pulls strongly in favour of exclusion.
3.
society’s interests in the adjudication of the case on its merits
the
final line of inquiry asks whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal
trial process would be better served by the admission or exclusion of the
evidence. relevant factors include the reliability of the evidence, the
importance of the evidence to the prosecution’s case, and the seriousness of
the offence at issue.
there
is no question that the evidence at issue is crucial to the crown’s case. while
the crown would be able to proceed absent the utterances, without the breath
readings, their case would be gutted, ending the prosecution. the breath
reading evidence is also highly reliable.
it
is also without question that impaired driving offences are among the most serious
in our community. drinking and driving destroys lives, ruptures families, and
decimates our collective feeling of safety and security. it is also entirely
preventable. every time someone drinks and drives, the risk to human life is
real.
these
factors would tend to suggest a strong pull in favour of inclusion of the
evidence. however, under this line of inquiry, i must also consider the
negative impact of admitting the evidence on the administration of justice. in
each case, it is the long-term repute of the administration of justice that
must be assessed. while the public has a heightened interest in a determination
on the merits where the offence is serious, it also has a vital interest in
maintaining a justice system above reproach.
in
this case, given the seriousness of the breach related to contacting counsel,
including the improper inducement tethered to mr. quinless’ liberty, what would
otherwise have been a very strong pull in favour of inclusion has been blunted.
while there is still a pull in favour of inclusion, it is only moderate given
society’s interest in having a justice system being beyond reproach.
4.
balancing
when
i balance the lines of inquiry, i find that the long-term repute of the
administration of justice demands exclusion of the evidence. that is because admitting
the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. the
breath samples and utterances are therefore excluded.
conclusion
given
my ruling, it is unnecessary for me to determine the issue of voluntariness. the
application to exclude the breath readings and utterances under s.24(2) of the
charter
is granted.
at
this point, i stress that i would have reached the same conclusion had i found
no breach to mr. quinless’ right to consult with counsel in private. the breaches
relating to mr. quinless being funneled to duty counsel through an engagement
of his liberty is so troubling that it would make the case for exclusion on its
own.
the
charge is dismissed. mr. quinless, you are free to go.
released:
february 11, 2025
signed: justice a. neil
singh
r. v. teja
, oncj 540 at paras 8-9.
nor did pc dickinson.
r v. roberts
,
2024 onca 411
at
para.
78
.
r v. kranz
,
2021 onsc 25
at
paras
62-64
.
the overlap between “impaired” and “80 plus” is particularly
significant because it is well settled that an offender cannot be convicted of
both offences arising out of the same factual circumstances pursuant to the
principles of
r v. kienapple,
1 scr 729
.
r v. suberu
,
2009 scc 33 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no.
33 at para
42
.
mr. quinless arrived at 22 division at approximately 1:37 a.m.
r v. underhill
,
1992 canlii 7709 (on sc)
,
oj no 1840 (s.c.j.)
;
r v. bothwell
,
2017
onsc 2316
at para
13
.
r. v. cairns
,
2004 canlii 17588 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 210 (c.a.) at para
10
r v. tomaszewicz
,
2024 oncj 661
at para
136
.
ibid at para 150.
r v. mcelwain
,
2020 onsc 344
at
para
9
r v. grant
,
2009 scc 32 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no.32 at para
76
.
ibid at para 79.
r v. mccolman
,
2023 scc 8
at
paras
69-70