ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. d.b.
, 2025 oncj 39
date:
2025 01 21
court
file no.:  4114998 y4811017
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
db, a young
person
before
justice cidalia faria
heard
on january 10, may 6, june 18, november 1, and december 20, 2024
reasons
for sentence released on january 21, 2025
brianne bovell..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
emma rhodes…………………………………………………………………
amicus
curiae
db   ........................................................................................ the
accused on his own behalf
faria j.:
i.
introduction
db first pled before me on january 10, 2024, to
indecent act he committed in 1974, when he was 17 years old.
the case then took several turns, including an application
by
amicus
curiae
,  challenging the constitutionality of ss. 42(5)(a)
and 42(2)(p) of the
youth criminal justice act
(
ycja
), alleging
the provisions violate
ss. 15
and
7
of the
canadian charter of rights and
freedoms
.
these provisions disentitle a young person from
a deferred custody and supervision order (dcso) for the offence of indecent act
because it is an offence that “causes or attempts to cause bodily harm”. the
provisions also limit the length of a dcso to 6 months. an adult who commits an
indecent act is eligible for a conditional sentence order (cso), the
criminal
code
equivalent of a dcso under the
ycja.
its length can be up
to 2 years less a day.
i followed the principle of horizontal
stare
decisis
, and found, as justice camara did in
r. v. t.m
.
2024 oncj
257
, that both sections violate
ss. 15
and
7
of the
charter
. i declared
ss. 42(5)(a) and 42(2)(p) invalid. (
r. v. d.b.,
2025 oncj 38
)
the matter is now finally ready for sentence,
and these are my reasons.
ii.
brief procedural history
db first pled guilty to an indecent act on
january 10, 2024 when he was represented by counsel.  the matter was adjourned
for material to be filed and for submissions to be made. i noted the
information was flawed and advised the parties. the plea was struck, a new
information filed, and db entered a proper guilty plea as a young person to
indecent act on june 18, 2024.
i then brought to counsel’s attention that his
position, that of a conditional sentence order under the
criminal code
is
unavailable to a young person, as is the
ycja
equivalent, a dcso because
an indecent act causes or attempts to cause bodily harm and is thus excluded per
s. 42(5)(a) of the
ycja
and limited to 6 months per s. 42(2)(p). i
referred him to a recent decision on the constitutionality of these provisions.
the sentencing was adjourned for counsel to consider his position.
counsel had been ill throughout the proceedings
and on november 1, 2024, applied to be removed from the record as he was
medically unable to continue to represent his client.  i granted the
application.
db received legal information, and then chose to
represent himself.
i appointed
amicus curiae
to assist with
the constitutional issue and heard submissions on december 20, 2024. as
indicated earlier, i found the impugned provisions unconstitutional in written
reasons earlier today.
iii.
circumstances of the offence
db is lif’s cousin. between january 1974 and
april 1974, lif was 5 years old and lived in toronto with her parents, her two
brothers, and 17-year-old db.  db had been sent to canada from italy to stay
with the family.
during this time, lif would be left alone with db.
on one occasion, lif was in db’s bedroom. she stood on his bed with her pants
down. db penetrated her vaginally with his fingers.
on a second occasion, db was in the laundry room
in the basement of the home with lif. he exposed his penis and placed it in her
mouth for her to perform fellatio. db ejaculated. he laughed when she said she
thought he had peed in her mouth.
on june 27, 2022, lif came forward and reported
the incidents to police, and on july 31, 2022, db surrendered to police.
iv.
db circumstances
db’s father abandoned him and his mother in a
small farming village in italy. his mother was unable to care for him, and
unable to protect him from violence. she sent him at the age of 13 to toronto
to live with relatives. once db arrived, he stayed with his aunt and uncle who
fed him and put a roof over his head but did not have the time or inclination
to provide much else. they did not parent him. further, because he was in
canada illegally, his relatives did not allow him to go to school. he just stayed
in the house when the other children went to school.
i infer db had to learn english and make his way
within that context from the age of 13.  when db committed the offence at the
age of 17, he had been abandoned by both his parents, he was alone, and
illegally in a foreign country. he was dependant on relatives for survival. he
had no education, no job, no guidance, and no social skills.
from these very compromised conditions, db went
on to make a life for himself. he learned to speak english and got a job.
although he could not read nor write in the english language, he attained
success in a company called dynamic tire and built a career. he married, and
supported his wife who had a mental health condition. he had two children whom
he raised, and who are now adults and attended court.
when the tire business required technical
skills, db was let go. this led to depression and severe health conditions. several
exhibits were filed documenting these conditions which include the fact he had
heart bypass surgery in 2023, has diabetes, an anxiety disorder, panic attacks,
insomnia, major depressive disorder, obstructive sleep apena, osteoarthritis
and chronic mechanical back pain. he takes numerous medications for these
conditions and medications for several other medical conditions that are not as
debilitating.
db is now a 68-year-old man with severe health
issues who lives on a small pension.  he sees his children and 5 grandchildren.
he gardens when he can. he volunteers in a community centre 4 hours a week when
he can. a very articulate letter filed by his granddaughter spoke of db’s
perseverance and positive influence on her life and the life of her family. she
described db as dedicated, selfless, encouraging, calm, responsible, steadfast,
and a remarkable pillar to her family.
v.
position of the parties
the crown recommends a 4-month custodial
sentence, and a 2-month supervision order. she also recommends a dna order.
db adopts the position of his former counsel that
his sentence should be served in the community as a dcso. neither his former
counsel nor db, representing himself, made submissions on the appropriate
length of the dcso.
vi.
legal principles
youth sentences are governed by the overarching
principles in s. 3 of the
ycja
. the youth criminal justice system is
intended to protect the public by holding young persons accountable through
measures that are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and
the degree of responsibility of the young person, promoting the rehabilitation
and reintegration of young persons and supporting the prevention of crime by
referring young persons to programming.
the system is separate from that of adults based on the principle
of diminished moral blameworthiness or culpability. this is the cornerstone of
youth sentencing as articulated in
r. v. d.b
.
2008 scc 25
.
it is noteworthy that a youth sentence should:
•
be less severe than
an adult sentence for the same offence.
•
be similar to sentences for other young people.
•
be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the young person.
•
be the least restrictive possible.
•
promote the rehabilitation of the young person.
•
promote the reintegration of the young person.
•
promote a sense of responsibility in the young
person.
general deterrence is not a permissible
objective of a youth sentence.
the purpose and principles of sentencing as set
out in s. 38 of the
ycja
must guide this court.  the principles of
accountability, proportionality, restraint, and the least restrictive sentence
capable of rehabilitation and promoting a sense of responsibility apply.
the sanction should also reinforce the
link between the offending behaviour and its consequences, respect for societal
values, reparation of harm to victims and the community.
vii.
analysis
i must consider db’s circumstances in 1974 when
he was 17 years old and committed the offence and apply the principles of
sentencing to a young person although before me today is a 68-year-old man. he
did not know then, what he knows now.  lif submitted a victim impact statement
(vis)
.
she informs the court that the offence still affects her today.  she is
traumatized for life, she trusts no one, and she is triggered by stories or
movies with similar situations.
even at the age of 17, db could see the immediate reaction of his
conduct and the way it disturbed and harmed his little cousin.
aggravating factors
this offence was committed against a very young
child. lif was only 5 years old at the time and completely unaware of the depth
of the sexual violation perpetrated against her. this was aptly captured by her
believing that db had urinated in her mouth.
db was in a position of trust in the family as
an older cousin, both in the view of the parents who left lif in his care, and
in the eyes of lif who likely perceived him as an adult given the age
difference.
the breach of trust was further exacerbated by
the fact db was a family member.
the sanctity of lif’s home was violated. the offence
was perpetrated where she was to have felt the safest. instead, she was deeply
violated.
the combination of the victim’s age, db’s
position of trust, and his relationship with her contributed to the significant
negative impact of this offence on the victim. her life has been adversely and
seriously impacted emotionally and psychologically. the offence also damaged
her relationship with her family and her interactions with others.
the degree of physical interference was
significant in both instances.
it is particularly abhorrent that db ejaculated
in lif’s mouth and laughed at her innocent disgust when she believed he had
urinated in her mouth.
mitigating factors
i must also consider factors in db’s favour. db communicated his
intention to plead guilty to his counsel from the start, and though it took
some time to reach fruition, it is considered an early plea. it saved valuable
resources in a strained justice system.
his plea obviates the need for the victim to testify. given the
intensity of the vis, a trial and even the gentlest of cross-examinations would
have had a very traumatizing effect on the victim.
db had no criminal record at the time he committed the offences, nor
has he acquired one in the last 50 years.
db’s circumstances at the time of the offence, as a young person,
were particularly compromised. he was sent to toronto alone, at the age of 13,
to live with strangers. though he was fed and housed, he was not parented. his education
was limited by the very people who were responsible for his care. he had no
family, no support, no education, no guidance, and was isolated in a foreign
country at the time of  the offences.
these circumstances of vulnerability further attenuate his
diminished culpability as a young person.
however, it is, in my view, db’s response to the accusation of
these offences as an adult that is most mitigating.
in june 2022, lif called db after decades of little or no contact
and accused him of molesting her as a child.  db took immediate responsibility.
he acknowledged his wrongdoing. he tried to ameliorate her pain. he apologized.
he demonstrated insight specifically telling her that it was all his fault.
he used words such as he was “stupid” “young”
and “ignorant”, but said it was “all my fault”. he did not deny or minimize or
deflect from the severity of his actions 50 years before.  he attempted to
repair the harm done, to no avail, but the effort matters.
unbeknownst to him, he was being recorded and
lif provided db’s confession to the police.
db’s immediate, authentic taking of responsibility for such severe,
damaging, and stigmatized conduct is unusual in these courts.
db turned himself in, and immediately indicated he would plead guilty.
db’s remorse is on audio. his remorse is demonstrated by his plea, and again
during his allocution when he again apologized for the offence.  he expressed the
shame he feels and the shame he has brought on his family, and his life, after
having accomplished so much.
principles
the nature of the offence db committed is grave.
it has negatively impacted lif all her life and will likely continue to. db’s
remorse, his apologies, and his plea cannot repair the harm done.
had db committed this offence as an adult, a cso
though available, would be insufficient to reflect the gravity of the offence and
the blameworthiness of the offender, nor would it adequately reflect the
denunciation and deterrence required for an adult offender.
however, neither the concept of blameworthiness
nor the principles of denunciation and deterrence apply in the same way to
young persons, and that is what db was when he committed the indecent act, a
young person.
his sentence must be proportionate to the
seriousness of his offence and the degree of his responsibility as a young
person.  the sentence must also be the least restrictive as possible in the
circumstances for a young person.
it is for these reasons that a dcso is the most
appropriate sentence in this case. it reflects both the gravity of the offence
and db’s diminished culpability by virtue of both his age and his circumstances
at the time he committed the offence.
the
ycja
limitation of 6 months, however,
is insufficient to reflect the proportionality required in this case.
the appropriate sentence must reflect the
community’s condemnation of what db did and sanction it as he understood it at
the time. his cruel laughter to the victim’s reaction and disgust demonstrated
he understood her innocence at the time and was not empathetic to it. that is
blameworthy conduct, in its context as a young person that must be reflected in
the sentence.   for this reason, a dcso significantly longer than 6 months is
warranted.
viii.sentence
db, i sentence you to a 2 year less a day deferred
custody and supervision order. the conditions of the order will be appended to
my reasons.
the maximum total penalty available under the
ycja
for this offence is 2 years, and for that reason, i cannot impose an additional
period of probation.
i will make a dna order for a sample to be taken
in this courthouse today.
released:  january
21, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria
appendix
a: dcso
db, you
will be placed on a
deferred custody and supervision order
for a period
of
2 years less a day commencing today, january 21, 2025
which is to be
served under conditional supervision in the community subject to the following
conditions
:
1.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
2.
appear before the court when required to do so.
3.
report to the provincial director or designate within
24 hours of this order and thereafter when and how as required by the
provincial director or designate.
4.
advise the provincial director or designate of
your address and report to the provincial director or designate any change of
address.
5.
attend and actively participate in all
assessments, counselling, and rehabilitative programs as directed by the
provincial director or designate, and in particular, in relation to sexual
boundaries.
6.
sign any releases to enable the provincial
director or designate to monitor your attendance and completion of all
assessments, counselling, and rehabilitative programs as directed by the
provincial director or designate.
7.
do not possess, own, or obtain control of any
weapon, ammunition, prohibited ammunition, prohibited device or explosive
substance.
8.
have no contact with lif directly or indirectly.
9.
not be within 100m of where lif lives, works,
goes to school, volunteers, worships, or you know her to be, except in the
presence of counsel or for court attendance.
10.
remain in your residence at all times during your
deferred custody and supervision order except:
(a)
in the case of medical emergencies involving
yourself.
(b)
for the purpose of travelling directly to, from
and during medical, dental, therapeutic, and counselling pre-scheduled
appointments, the details for which you will provide to the provincial director
or designate.
(c)
for the purpose of travelling to, from while in
a place of worship once a week, the details for which you will provide to the
provincial director or designate.
(d)
from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. on saturdays for the
purpose of obtaining the necessities of life.
(e)
when in the direct presence of your daughter or
son-in-law between the hours of 10 a.m. and 9 p.m., with prior written approval
from the provincial director or designate.
(f)
with the specific, dated, written pre-approval
of the provincial director or designate, the approval for which will be carried
on your person.
i read my reasons orally and advised the parties that should there be any
difference between my oral reasons and my written reasons, it is written
reasons that prevail.
exhibits 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12 from medical professionals, and  from
the vaughan innovative medical clinic, list each diagnosis, its symptoms, and db’s
medication, and his ongoing medical requirements.
exhibit 9, letter of ic.
r. v. bwp;
r. v. bvn
,
2006 scc 27
, paras.
22- 26
.
exhibit 1: victim impact statement by lf includes several
statements which are inadmissible such as unproven allegations about db, his
children, and others. some of these allegations are specifically denied in
writing by db’s daughter pc in exhibit 2.  these allegations are not considered
part of the vis.
exhibit 3: audio recording of db speaking to lif in june 2022.