ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. m.g.
, 2025 oncj 459
date:
2025 09 03
court
file no.: 23-48101907
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
m.g.
before
justice c. faria
heard
november 18, 19, 20, 2024, december 13, 18, and 19, 2024,
april
4, 7, and may 12, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 3, 2025
seeta scully......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
anne marie morphew......................................................
counsel for the defendant m.g.
faria j.:
i.
overview
on february 28, 2023, m.g. and his wife, l.s.b. were
having an argument. she ran to the neighbour’s house and called the police.
when police spoke to her, she said m.g. made a gesture to assault her. when
asked if m.g. had ever been violent, l.s.b. said he “raped”
her in 2006 and 2013. m.g. is
charged with one count of assault and two counts of sexual assault contrary to
ss. 266
and
271
of the
criminal code
.
the crown proceeded by indictment
, and the trial began on
november 18, 2024
.
the trial was interrupted for l.s.b. to obtain independent legal advice. a ruling
on a motion for directions
and a ruling on what a witness caution means
was required. at the end of the crown’s case, a ruling dismissing a directed
verdict application on the assault count was made, as was a ruling on the
admissibility of a statement m.g. allegedly made to a therapist 18 years ago.
only two witnesses testified: l.s.b. for the crown, and
m.g. in his own defence. two agreed statements of fact were filed; several
photos and a drawing were made exhibits.
the trial completed on may 12, 2025, and these are my
reasons for judgement.
ii.
issues
there are two main issues:
i.
has the crown proven the essential
actus reus
elements of an assault?
ii.
has the crown proven each element of the three
counts beyond a reasonable doubt?
both issues are dependant on the court’s findings of
the witness’ credibility and reliability.
iii.
legal principles
per s. 265 (1)(b), a person commits an assault when:
he attempts or threatens, by an act or a
gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes that other
person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability to effect
his purpose;
sexual assault,
s. 271
, is the direct, or indirect, intentional touching
of a person, in circumstances of a sexual nature, without their consent to that
sexual activity, knowing they do not consent to that sexual activity,
consent is defined as “the voluntary agreement of the
complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question,” per s. 273.1(1).
as in every criminal case, the onus rests upon the crown to
prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, which is inextricably linked to the
presumption of innocence. the onus rests with the prosecution throughout the
trial and never shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common
sense, which must be logically based upon the evidence or lack of evidence. it
is higher than a balance of probabilities, yet less than proof to an absolute
certainty.
when i consider what evidence to accept, i must consider the
credibility and reliability of every witness. credibility relates to whether a
witness is speaking the truth. reliability relates to the actual
accuracy of the testimony. the credibility and reliability of a witness must be
“tested in the light of all the other evidence presented.”
i
may accept some, all, or none of a witness’ testimony.
in the context of a defendant testifying, the guiding analytical
framework is provided by
r. v. w.d
.
which stipulates the following:
i.
if i accept the evidence of the accused, i must
acquit.
ii.
even if i do not accept the evidence of the
accused, but it leaves me with a reasonable doubt, i must acquit.
iii.
even if the accused’s evidence does not raise a reasonable doubt, i must
consider all the evidence i accept to satisfy myself the crown has met its high
burden and proven beyond a reasonable doubt all the essential elements of each
offence. if it does not, i must acquit.
i also instruct myself not to approach the evidence with unwarranted
assumptions as to what is or is not sexual assault; what is or is not consent;
what kind of person may or may not be the complainant of a sexual assault what
kind of person may or may not commit a sexual assault; or what a person who is
being, or has been, sexually assaulted will or will not do or say. there is no
typical victim or typical assailant or typical situation or typical reaction. i
caution myself, thus, so as not to reach any conclusions based on misconceptions
or myths.
iv.
summary of evidence & findings of fact
l.s.b. met m.g. when she arrived in canada in 2003 and attended m.g.’s
family’s private language school. they became romantically involved in 2004. l.s.b.
travelled back and forth between canada and brazil until m.g. proposed to her in
brazil in 2007.  l.s.b. came back to canada later that year and the two lived
together. they married in december 2009.  l.s.b. and m.g. have two children.
count 1: assault february 28, 2023
on february 28, 2023, l.s.b. sent m.g. an email about their
relationship saying she did not want to speak to him. she informed m.g. that she
did not want to ride with him in the family car anymore. she was going to use
the only family car herself and while she was with the children; he would have
to make his way to work on his own. when m.g. came home that evening, he wanted
to discuss the email and how to get to work the next morning. l.s.b. was
putting the children to bed and did not want to speak to him.
l.s.b. testified:
•
she was putting the children to bed at 8 p.m.
when m.g. arrived home. she was upstairs. she did not want to speak to m.g., and
he yelled at her while she only raised her voice.
•
later that evening, m.g. came up from the
basement and wanted to discuss the email for a second time. again, l.s.b. told him
she did not want to speak to him.
•
m.g. became upset. he screamed and punched the
table.
•
she was scared as she felt he was, “trying to
break the physical distance,” that she was trying to keep from him.
•
she ran to the front door and opened it as he
kept screaming.
•
m.g. told her she could, “call the neighbours, call
all the neighbours,” she wanted, and he “made a motion.” she thought he was
coming to hit her, so she ran out with her socks on, a tea towel in her hand,
and no jacket to her neighbour’s house.
•
l.s.b. described m.g.’s motion as taking a step walking
towards her. he was about 2.5 feet away. she demonstrated the gesture as having
both arms in the air, hands in fists over her head.
•
her neighbour refused to call the police, but
she had her phone in her pocket and did so herself.
l.s.b.’s credibility and reliability were significantly undermined
during cross-examination.
l.s.b. testified with absolute certainty about everything. she would
not admit minor inconsistencies against interest, even when they were blatantly
obvious. she was repeatedly reluctant to admit she testified differently when
compared to the statements she made to the police, even when, again, there were
clear differences.
for instance:
i.
l.s.b. testified she did not scream at m.g.
during their argument, she merely “raised her voice” to be heard. she would not
admit she said she screamed at m.g., until it was shown to her that is what she
told police. when confronted with this inconsistency, l.s.b. insisted she was
referring to their second argument after the children were in bed. however, in
her statement she is clearly refers to 8 p.m. when m.g. arrived home.
ii.
l.s.b. testified that m.g. was waving his arms
above his head, hands in fists, and walking toward her, which frightened her
and made her think he was going to hit her. in cross-examination, after she was
shown a video of herself explaining and demonstrating to the officer the
specific one-handed pointing gesture m.g. made, l.s.b. continued to deny this
was the specific, and only gesture she complained of when asked by the police
what m.g. had done. she repeatedly responded, “he made many gestures.”  l.s.b.
would not admit the obvious.
iii.
l.s.b. admitted she knew m.g. was not trying to
hit her.
iv.
when asked by the crown if there were any family
court proceedings ongoing at the time or that had been started on february 28,
2023. l.s.b. responded “no, absolutely not.” in cross-examination, l.s.b.
admitted that she told the police she had consulted a family lawyer, her family
lawyer was preparing court documents, she wanted temporary custody of the
children, and she wanted m.g. to move out of the house.
m.g. testified that he recalled only one argument on february 28,
2023. he had gone to the basement when he came home to be away from l.s.b. when
he came up from the basement, she was in the kitchen. he asked her if he could
get a ride to work in the morning and be dropped off first, so they did not
have to be in the car alone together. he testified she screamed at him that she
did not want to speak to him. they began to argue, and they both screamed.
m.g. testified that l.s.b. waved her arms above her head, punched
the counter and pointed at him. he mimicked her, including pointing at her. she
went to the front door, he turned to face her, he was never close to her, and
she stormed out of the house. he followed her to the door and yelled at her as
she went down the walkway that she could go “call all the neighbours.”
he admitted he was angry; he mimicked her actions and called her an
insulting name. however, he made no motion towards her, did not gesture as if
to assault her, and had no intention of assaulting l.s.b.
finding
i find that l.s.b. and m.g. had a loud, angry argument in their
kitchen on the evening of february 28, 2023. they both screamed. m.g.
understandably wanted to talk about l.s.b.’s email, how he was going to get to
work, and their relationship. l.s.b. unilaterally decided she did not want to
discuss the email she had sent.
i find m.g. pointed at l.s.b. during the argument and taunted her to
go tell the neighbours when she walked out the door.
however, in this circumstance, yelling and pointing and taunting does
not amount to an assault by gesture. m.g. neither attempted nor threatened, by
this act, to apply force to l.s.b.  she did not believe that he was going, or
that he had the intention to affect this purpose.
i find m.g. not guilty of this count.
count 2:  sexual assault allegation december
2006
when then the crown asked l.s.b. what happened to her one night in
december 2006, l.s.b. testified with an extended, uninterrupted, chronological,
narrative with minute detail. she testified that:
•
both she and m.g. were in bed in his basement
apartment on ossington avenue watching television one evening that december.
she was sitting up with two pillows behind her back. m.g. was lying to her left.
•
he was wearing grey underwear and a t-shirt.
•
m.g. began to kiss her and touch her chest. she
raised her hands to stop him and said no. he continued.
•
he knelt beside her, took off his grey underwear
with one hand and held her hands with the other.
•
she was wearing loose, silky pink pyjamas with
brown squares.
•
m.g. knelt on top of her with one knee on each
side of her. he pulled down her pajamas three times and she pulled them back.
there was a struggle. m.g. pulled down her pyjama bottoms first with his left
knee, then with his right knee.
•
once her pyjama bottoms were down, he forcefully
penetrated her vaginally without her consent.
•
she resisted him throughout. once m.g.
“finished”, he lay back down on her left side. she pulled up the blue covers.
•
she told m.g. she did not like what he had done
while he lay with his back to her, facing the wall. he told her he wanted to
sleep and flung his arm back, throwing a “punch” on her stomach, which was
covered with the blanket.
•
she got scared and went to the washroom. she
showered. when she returned to the bedroom, m.g. was asleep.
•
three days later, she spoke to m.g. about the
“rape.” he did not want to speak to her about it.
•
she spoke to m.g.’s older sister and told her
about it in room 212 of the school.
•
his sister gave l.s.b. her therapist’s name, maureen
toms, and phone number.
•
l.s.b. contacted ms. toms and went to 3
counselling sessions alone in early 2007.
•
l.s.b. told m.g. that he had to go to a joint
counselling session, or she would leave the relationship.
•
l.s.b. testified when the therapist confronted m.g.
with the rape:
“he denied, he lied. the
therapist was able to speak to him and she asked him twice, she didn’t use the
word rape. she asked him twice if he had taken me and he got very upset. he was
sitting on a chair with arms on my left side, he punched them, the chair, stood
up, and maureen that he had taken me and then he looked at me and he said yes,
i took you. and then he went for the door, he started putting his shoes on and
there some conversation between maureen and him. she was able to bring him back
to the chair. he sat on the chair with his shoes on and he looked at her and he
said that he was sorry for taking me. and then he looked at me and he said that
he was sorry for hurting me.”
•
l.s.b. understood m.g. to be apologizing to her
about “raping” her.
•
they agreed not to have sex if m.g. had had any
alcohol and called it the “no alcohol” rule as a result.
l.s.b.’s credibility and reliability were significantly undermined
during cross-examination on this count as well.
when an officer returned to l.s.b.’s home, on march 1, 2023, the day
after her first statement to police reporting the events of february 28, 2023,
l.s.b. made a statement alleging that m.g. had “raped” her in december 2005.
the next day, after doing “research,” which consisted of looking at
her passports and emails, l.s.b. contacted the officer via email correcting the
date of the sexual assault to in the month of december 2006.
on november 19, 2024, in cross-examination l.s.b. confirmed 3 times that
the interviewing officer wanted details about the december 2006 sexual assault
allegations. she confirmed that she “did not have a clear image of what happened”
when she provided her statement and sometimes did not remember details during
the march 1, 2023 statement.
when confronted with how specific her evidence of the event was when
she testified in court, in comparison to her police statement, l.s.b. testified
she attended 3 or 4 sessions with her therapist, a psychologist. she testified:
“i had to go to therapy and my therapist
walked me through those very difficult images so we could piece some of it
together.”
the therapist “helped me go back to those
moments and recover some memories.”
when l.s.b. returned to court on april 4, 2025, to continue her
cross-examination:
•
she described the sessions with her therapist on
the phone as one-on-one.
•
she explained, to her, “recovered memory” means
she “recovered flashbacks of the memory.”
•
she explained, to her, “walk” through meant her
therapist made her “relive – live again the experience.”
•
she testified that she sent detective jing an
email to correct the date of the december sexual assault allegation and
attached a december 2006 email to her therapist at the time alleging a “rape.”
•
she said she did not tell the officer she had
“recovered memories” because she did not believe the officer needed or wanted
more details about the sexual assault of december 2006, nor that such “details
would be important to her (the officer).”
•
she thought that the police were not really “very
interested” in the case, even though the officer contacted her several times
and did want more information.
l.s.b. further explained:
•
flashbacks are, “images that pop in my head and
sometimes they are very colourful, sometimes they just go dark.”
•
“sometimes they just go very dark, like black. i
have very vivid and colourful and then it just goes black. they come and they
go. they are quite intrusive. i don’t choose to have them, but i can go back to
those specific images, those flashbacks that come in my head.
•
“i am capable of going back to some of those
flashbacks. they’re not always completely clear, but they are present, they are
with me.”
•
the difference between a memory and a flashback
is that a flashback is “not a regular memory for me.”
•
sometimes the flashback “fades away and comes
back.” she does not “control those flashbacks. they just come,” which can be
about, “different parts of the same event.”
•
sometimes she sees the color of m.g.’s shirt,
but “sometimes i just see his waist.” sometimes she sees m.g.’s face, sometimes
she does not. when she does “see his face” it is “always mad.”
•
her flashbacks were “very very cloudy, very very
dark” on the day she gave her statement.
•
she needed “help” remembering all m.g.’s
physical movements. she did not remember them when she gave her statement but recovered
those memories in flashbacks.
when asked if her testimony was “all from these flashbacks,” l.s.b.
responded “yes.” when l.s.b. provided her statement to police, “those
flashbacks, they were not vivid. they were not all there.” she did not have
“the full alive flashbacks” in her mind at the time.
l.s.b. agreed that when she testified in-chief, she added many new
details about the december 2006 sexual assault that she did not provide to
police, since she “recovered” said details from “flashbacks.” she also agreed
that she did not tell the police details she did remember in “flashbacks”
because she thought they were unimportant.
in cross-examination, l.s.b. insisted the “only” reason she and m.g.
attended joint counseling in early 2007 was the “rape” and for no other issues
in their relationship.  she eventually relented and agreed that it was the
“rape” and “alcohol,” as a “no sex with alcohol rule” was established after the
counselling.
l.s.b.’s evidence of the particular portion of the joint therapy session,
where the therapist confronts m.g. with whether or not he had “taken” l.s.b.,
is described in minute and perfectly chronologically choreographed detail even
though the session occurred over 18 years ago.
l.s.b. does not remember anything else about that session: not what
she said, not what else was discussed, not want else m.g. discussed, not what
and how the therapist approached the allegation, and not how the issue was
resolved in the session.
m.g. testified in a straight-forward, direct manner. he did not
evade questions. he admitted conduct against interest. he acknowledged his
alcohol use has been an issue throughout his marriage with l.s.b., who does not
drink at all. he agreed they had a “no alcohol rule” if they were going to have
sex. he acknowledged the relationship had troubled times throughout.
m.g. acknowledged that the age of the two allegations affected his
memory about specific details, such as explicit words used, and the order of
events.
m.g. testified he never had sexual intercourse without l.s.b.’s
consent in december of 2006. m.g. testified they were having difficulties at
the time and he went to two therapy sessions to work on their relationship issues.
these issues included l.s.b. wanting to get married because she only had a
visitor visa, and m.g. being hesitant to commit. they had sexual challenges in
their relationship because l.s.b. experienced pain during intercourse, and she
was upset he had not disclosed to her his own childhood sexual trauma. m.g.
testified l.s.b. had never spoken to him about a rape before going to therapy.
during the last joint therapy session, m.g. testified he remembers
each person had to take a turn speaking. he did not recall the word “rape”
being used but remembered the gist of the conversation. when l.s.b. said she
was upset that he would want to have sex with her even though he knew it was
painful for her, he became upset and angry, he raised his voice and was
probably yelling.
m.g. testified he said it was “bullshit” but was told it was not his
turn to speak. the therapist asked him to leave the room because he was angry.
he did so and waited for 20 or 30 minutes while the therapist spoke to l.s.b.
alone. he testified he returned to the room and remembered the therapist
telling him to listen if he wanted the relationship to continue. he testified
no specific sexual activity in december 2006 was mentioned. he felt the
therapist was trying to get him to say sorry for raping l.s.b. but he would
not. he testified he refused to acknowledge or apologize for a rape. he said he
was sorry about l.s.b.’s feelings and that the relationship was not going well.
he paid the therapist; they left and had a long awkward bus ride home. he
testified this accusation of rape never came up again until he was arrested in
february 2023.
finding
some sort of sexual activity that l.s.b. called a “rape” occurred in
december 2006. it was an event that led her to seek therapy in early 2007. it
was an accusation she seemed to make and was discussed in couples’ counselling
in early 2007.
sexual assault is a traumatizing event. the passage of time erodes
memory. l.s.b.’s admission that she tried to “forgive and forget” further
clouded her recollection.
when police asked l.s.b. on february 28, 2023, if m.g. had ever been
violent, she told them he had “raped” her. the next day, when she was
interviewed by detective jing, she told the officer she had been in bed with
m.g., in an apartment on ossington, watching t.v. when m.g. tried to kiss her, and
touch her.  he pulled down her pants and held her hands. she said she was immobilized,
said “no” and he vaginally raped her. she showered and tried to talk to him
about it.
that appears credible and reliable. however, l.s.b. went on to
describe these memories as “very cloudy” “flashbacks” that she had that day,
and that she did not tell the detective everything she remembered even though
she was asked to.
l.s.b. went on to testify that she went to therapy after making her
statement to police in march of 2023 and “recovered memories” via “flashbacks.”
this is what led to her testimony of a chronological, minutely choregraphed
narrative of the entirety of the sexual assault that occurred almost 18 years ago.
these flashbacks were sometimes “colourful” and “vivid” and sometimes “dark.”
given the manner l.s.b. “recovered” these memories with the
assistance of a third party, the unusual description of her “flashbacks” as
clear and available to her, and sometimes, “dark” and unavailable to her,
l.s.b.’s evidence is unreliable.
l.s.b.’s assertion that m.g. “apologized for ‘taking’” her during a
single joint therapy session almost 18 years ago is also unreliable. she again
testifies to an exact sequence of events and language used, but then, remembers
nothing else about the session.
m.g.’s evidence, with the admission that he is not sure about all
the words used, and who said what, but what the gist of the conversation was on
this point in a session so long ago is credible. even if the court were to
accept l.s.b.’s recollection of m.g.’s admission, m.g.’s evidence as to what
happened in that session, and what it was he apologized for raises a reasonable
doubt.
l.s.b. is clearly convinced that her “flashbacks” of a sexual event
in december 2006 and a portion of a joint therapy session in early 2007 are
real and accurate. this court, however, is not convinced.
m.g. likely, even probably, touched l.s.b. in a sexual manner in
december 2006 without her consent, or in some way that deeply troubled l.s.b. he
had likely been drinking which also upset her and always had. however,
likely
touched, and
probably
touched, is not sufficient. it is not the legal
onus to be met.
the crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that m.g. forcibly
vaginally penetrated l.s.b. in december 2006.
count 3: sexual assault allegation may-june
2013.
l.s.b. testified that while she and m.g. were living in a house on
pape avenue, sometime in may or june 2013, after returning from a trip to
chicago, m.g. sexually assaulted her as follows:
•
m.g. came home late and went to bed. she had
seen him with a beer, and his breath smelled of beer.
•
they both lay in bed watching tv.
•
m.g. took off his underwear and jumped on top of
her.
•
he had a “hard on,” and she told him “no.”  m.g.
quickly pulled her pajamas off with both hands and threw his body on top of hers.
he vaginally penetrated her with his penis and ejaculated. it lasted 2 or 3
minutes.
•
she remembers m.g. taking off his glasses and
putting them on the bedside table, and thinking she needed to get through one
more day before the weekend when she could process her feelings.
•
she spoke to m.g. the next day about it and he
said he was just having fun.
•
she had been thinking of moving out but did not
because she learned she was pregnant in july 2013.
•
l.s.b. believes the conception was the result of
the sexual assault.
•
some of m.g.’s behaviour changed when he learned
she was pregnant, and she decided to stay in the relationship as it would be
best for their child.
in cross-examination, l.s.b. confirmed that this memory of the 2013
event was also the result of “flashbacks,” though these were not as clear as
her “flashbacks” about the december 2006 event.
m.g. testified that the relationship was good in may and june of
2013. he recalls l.s.b. getting her citizenship in may of that year. he was
happy when l.s.b. told him she was pregnant, though he remembers he was
surprised she had not told him earlier. he remembers they were both happy about
the pregnancy.
m.g. denies having any sexual intercourse with l.s.b. without her
consent during that time. he testified l.s.b. never informed him of her belief
about their child’s conception. the first he heard of this allegation was after
he was arrested and watched l.s.b.’s video statement when he heard her say that.
finding
i am mindful that i may accept some, all, or none of a witnesses’
evidence. i also note that l.s.b.’s evidence on this 2013 count was not shaken,
challenged or undermined either by inconsistencies or omissions in her police
videotaped statement, as was her evidence on the first two counts.
however, the damage to her credibility on the first count lingers,
and the concern with her reliability on the second count affects this third
count.
l.s.b.’s memory “flashbacks” of the 2013 sexual assault allegation
are less clear, less fulsome, and less detailed than those of the 2006
allegation, although it is alleged to have been significantly more recent. moreover,
the 2013 allegation is also attached, in l.s.b.’s mind, to a significant life
event, that of conception.
yet, neither the recency, relatively speaking, nor the significance
of the result of the event, make the memory clear to l.s.b. rather she is
dependant on her “flashback” recovery process with her therapist to obtain the “flashback,”
which in her words is “cloudy.”
again, given the source of l.s.b.’s memory, that of “flashbacks” she
retrieved with the assistance of a therapist, and its “cloudy” nature, i find
l.s.b.’s evidence on this count to be unreliable.
m.g.’s evidence that the relationship, to his knowledge, was good
at the time, and that both he and l.s.b. were happy she was pregnant also
provides a different context to the 2013 allegation than that provided by
l.s.b. given the limited information l.s.b. seemed to share with m.g. about her
thoughts of leaving him at the time, m.g.’s evidence seems quite plausible. his
simple straightforward denial that he did not have sexual intercourse with
l.s.b. without her consent, also appears plausible.
the crown has not proven the sexual assault charge of 2013 beyond a
reasonable doubt.
v.
conclusion
for all the reasons stated above, there will be an acquittal on all
three charges.
released:  september
3, 2025.
signed:
justice c. c. g. faria
the word “rape” is the word repeatedly used and preferred by the complainant
and used by the parties.
the crown erroneously proceeded summarily on november 18, 2024. on november 20,
2024, the error was identified. on consent, the proceedings were struck. m.g.
was re-arraigned, the crown proceeded by indictment, the defence elected to
proceed before the ontario court of justice, and the parties agreed all the
evidence that had been heard would apply to the trial properly proceeding by
indictment.
there was a pre-trial oral s. 276 ruling made on april 15, 2024, with written
reasons provided to the parties on january 6, 2025.
r. v. m.g
.,
2024 oncj 666
.
r. v. m.g
.,
2024 oncj 652
.
r. v. m.g
.,
2025 oncj 246
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
14
, 39.
r. v. stewart
,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca)
, o.j. no.
811 (c.a.) at para
27
.
r. v. c.p.
,
2021 scc 19
at para.
35
.
r. v. w.d.,
1 r.c.s. at p.743.
r. v. seaboyer; r. v. gayme
,
1991 canlii 76 (scc)
, 2 scr 577 at pp. 679-680;
r. v. darrach
,
2000 scc 46
at paras.
32-37
;
r. v. find
,
2001 scc 32
at para.
103
;
r. v. j.l.
,
2018
onca 756
at paras.
46-47
;
r. v. jc
,
2021 onca 131
at paras.
93-98
;
r.
v. j.j.
,
2022 scc 28
at para.
1
.
transcript, november 19, 2024, at p. 29.
transcript: november 18, 2025, pp. 33-34.
transcript: november 18, 2025, p. 73.
transcript, april 4, 2025, at pps. 3-13.
transcript, april 4, 2025, at pp. 20-22.
transcript, april 4, 2025, at p. 48.
transcript, april 4, 2025, at pp. 39.  43.
transcript, april 4, 2025, at p. 24.