ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. camara,
2025 oncj
619
date:
2025 11 26
court
file no.:  hamilton 24-47105343
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ricco camara
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on august 28, 2025
ruling on admissibility of expert
evidence
released on november 26, 2025
taylor ormond.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
jaime stephenson............................................
counsel for the accused ricco camara
fiorucci j.:
overview
on september 22, 2024, hamilton police were
dispatched to investigate a report that a male pulled out a gun and pointed it
at a complainant. the police located the accused, ricco camara, who matched the
description of the suspect. the accused was arrested and searched incident to
arrest. in a cross-bag strapped to the accused, police located a handgun and
ammunition in a magazine. in the accused’s pockets, police located drugs and
cash. the accused was charged with firearms and ammunition offences on one
information and drugs and proceeds of crime offences on a separate information.
this prosecution relates to the drugs and
proceeds of crime. the police charged the accused with possession of three schedule
i substances for the purpose of trafficking, cocaine, fentanyl, and oxycodone.
the proceeds charge relates to $1,660 in canadian currency in various
denominations that the police found on the accused’s person. the crown stayed
the oxycodone charge and proceeded with the fentanyl and cocaine charges. the accused
admits knowledge and control of the fentanyl and cocaine. he denies that he
possessed these substances for the purpose of trafficking and denies that the cash
is proceeds of crime.
the crown seeks to elicit expert opinion
evidence from detective constable ryan goch of the hamilton police service to assist
the court in drawing the inference that the accused was in possession of
fentanyl and cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. the crown wants the
officer qualified as an expert in relation to all three substances
notwithstanding that the crown directed a stay of proceedings to be entered in
relation to the oxycodone charge. the defence contested the admissibility of
expert evidence through detective constable goch, saying that his evidence is
not necessary and that he is not properly qualified.
a
voir dire
was held to determine
the admissibility of the proposed evidence. detective constable goch was
examined and cross-examined on the
voir dire.
these
reasons explain why i qualify detective constable goch to give expert opinion
evidence in relation to cocaine and fentanyl but not oxycodone. in this ruling,
i will set out the nature and scope of the expert evidence the crown is
permitted to tender through the officer.
agreed statement of facts
the accused entered not guilty pleas to the
charges of possession of fentanyl and cocaine for the purpose of trafficking
and possession of proceeds of crime under $5,000. the parties filed an agreed
statement of facts setting out admissions the accused is prepared to make at
his trial pursuant to
s. 655
of the
criminal code
.
the accused admits that, when the police searched
him incident to arrest, they found $1,660 canadian in
his left front jeans pocket, in the following denominations: (i) 4 x $5
bills, (ii) 4 x $10 bills, (iii) 40 x $20 bills, (iv) 10 x $50 bills, and (v) 3
x $100 bills.
in the accused’s right rear jeans pocket, the police located a
clear plastic bag with a red zip closure holding 30 pills of oxycodone. in his left rear jeans pocket was clear twisted plastic holding 19
small plastic dime bags containing p-fluorofentanyl, an analogue of fentanyl. the
19 individual dime bags each contained the following amounts of p-fluorofentanyl:
1. 0.1 grams,
2. 0.11 grams,
3. 0.11 grams,
4. 0.11 grams,
5. 0.11 grams,
6. 0.11 grams,
7. 0.07 grams,
8. 0.1 grams,
9. 0.08 grams,
10. 0.1 grams,
11. 0.1 grams,
12. 0.1 grams,
13. 0.06 grams,
14. 0.1 grams,
15. 0.07 grams,
16. 0.1 grams,
17. 0.09 grams,
18. 0.07 grams, and
19. 0.06 grams.
the combined weight of the p-fluorofentanyl in
the 19 dime bags was 1.75 grams.
in the accused’s left rear jeans pocket, the
police found twisted clear plastic holding 10 small, folded paper baggies
containing cocaine. the 10 folded paper baggies contained the following amounts
of cocaine:
1. 0.18 grams,
2. 0.17 grams,
3. 0.22 grams,
4. 0.21 grams,
5. 0.14 grams,
6. 0.18 grams,
7. 0.16 grams,
8. 0.19 grams,
9. 0.18 grams, and
10. 0.18 grams.
the combined weight of the cocaine in the 10
paper baggies was 1.81 grams.
on the ground near the accused, the police located three cell
phones, a 9-millimetre bullet, and a silver bandana.
the scope of the proposed expert opinion
evidence
exhibit 1 on the
voir dire
is a statement
filed by the crown setting out the scope of the proposed expert opinion
evidence. during submissions, crown counsel made slight amendments to the scope
of the proposed evidence. the crown asks that detective constable goch be
qualified to give expert opinion evidence in relation to cocaine, fentanyl and
oxycodone drug trafficking generally, and specifically pricing, quantity,
street terminology and language, consumption habits of users, purchase
patterns, conduct of drug trafficking and indicia of trafficking.
the admissibility framework for
expert opinion evidence
expert opinion evidence is presumptively
inadmissible. the party tendering the evidence must establish its admissibility
on the balance of probabilities.
a two-stage analysis governs the admissibility of such evidence. at the first
stage, the party seeking to introduce the evidence is required to establish the
following threshold requirements:
(1)
that the evidence is
logically relevant
to an issue in the specific case;
(2)
that the evidence is
necessary
;
(3)
that the evidence does not infringe on
an
exclusionary rule of evidence
;
(4)
that the expert is
properly qualified
.
if the threshold criteria are met, the analysis moves
on to the “gatekeeper” stage, where the judge engages in a case-specific
cost-benefit analysis to determine whether the benefits of admitting the
evidence outweigh the costs.
this stage focuses on the legal relevance and reliability of the evidence.
in the accused’s case, the defence contested
admission only on the bases that the evidence is not necessary, and detective
constable goch is not properly qualified. i will nonetheless address the other
requirements of admissibility for sake of completeness and because it will
assist in explaining my finding regarding the oxycodone.
threshold inquiry
relevance
at the threshold stage, relevance refers to
logical relevance. in
r. v. abbey,
justice doherty said that the
evidence must “have a tendency as a matter of human experience and logic to
make the existence or non-existence of a fact in issue more or less likely than
it would be without that evidence”.
in
r. v. (j.-l.)
, the supreme court of canada
(scc) provided a slightly different definition, saying that evidence is
relevant
“where it has
some tendency
as a matter of logic and human experience to make the proposition for which it
is advanced more likely than that proposition would appear to be in the absence
of that evidence”.
the scc said that this concept of relevance-“some tendency”- provides a low
threshold. it is different from legal relevance which is assessed at the “gatekeeper”
stage, where the judge must determine, on balance whether the probative value
of the evidence outweighs the potential prejudice or impact on the trial
process.
the accused is charged with possession of
cocaine and fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking which requires the crown to
establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was in possession of these
illegal substances (the
actus reus
) and that the possession was for the
purpose of trafficking (the
mens rea
). the evidence the crown seeks to
adduce through detective constable goch - the conduct associated with drug
trafficking of cocaine and fentanyl, including pricing, quantity, street
terminology and language, consumption habits of users, purchase patterns, and
indicia of trafficking - is relevant to the issue of whether the accused was in
possession of these substances for the purpose of trafficking.
the crown has not articulated with sufficient
clarity how the officer’s proposed expert opinion evidence regarding oxycodone
is relevant to a fact in issue in this litigation. the crown stayed the charge
relating to oxycodone. in submissions, crown counsel said that evidence about
the oxycodone was “peripherally relevant” and acknowledged that, on the
voir
dire
, she did not spend as much time questioning detective constable goch
about oxycodone. crown counsel alluded to the fact that oxycodone, like the
cocaine and fentanyl, was an item of value that the police located on the
accused’s person. however, this does not establish on the balance of
probabilities that the officer’s proposed expert opinion evidence regarding
oxycodone is relevant to the material issue in this case, which is the purpose
for which the accused was in possession of cocaine and fentanyl. the crown’s
application to elicit expert opinion evidence about oxycodone fails at this
stage.
necessity
to be necessary, the opinion must provide information
“which is likely to be outside the experience and knowledge of a judge or
jury”.
the evidence must be more than merely helpful, but necessity need not be judged
by too strict a standard.
absolute necessity is not required.
the expert evidence must be
necessary to allow the trier of fact to either “appreciate the facts due to
their technical nature”, or “to form a correct judgment on a matter if ordinary
persons are unlikely to do so without the assistance of persons with special
knowledge”.
defence counsel says that detective constable
goch’s evidence is not necessary because the agreed statement of facts shows
that this is a straightforward case requiring me to determine whether the
accused was in possession of the cocaine and the fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking. the defence submits that i can form my own conclusions on that
issue from the proven facts, without the expert opinion evidence.
with respect, the defence position assumes that
i am approaching the question of the accused’s purpose for possessing the
illegal substances with experience and knowledge of the consumption and sale of
cocaine and fentanyl. because expert opinion evidence regarding drug
trafficking practices is generally admissible, it may be that certain portions
of detective constable goch’s evidence will be familiar to me, having heard
similar evidence in past cases. however, as the officer pointed out in his
evidence on the
voir dire
, he routinely consults with other
investigators and drug experts to keep current on drug trends including pricing,
suggesting that the information an officer can provide about drug trafficking
practices, including things such as pricing and quantities, is not fixed but
can evolve. the information that detective constable goch would convey to the
court are not facts upon which judicial notice can be taken because they are so
commonly accepted as accurate that evidentiary proof is not required.
expert evidence is admissible to explain the practices and habits
of drug traffickers, including the significance of quantities, packaging, and
pricing, because these matters are outside the knowledge of ordinary jurors and
judges, and are necessary to assist the trier of fact in determining whether
possession was for personal use or for the purpose of trafficking.
i find that the evidence about drug trafficking
in cocaine and fentanyl and consumption habits of users that the crown seeks to
adduce is outside my experience and knowledge and is necessary for me to
form a correct judgment on the issue of whether the
accused was in possession of the substances for the purpose of trafficking.
absence of any exclusionary rule
it was not argued that any exclusionary rule barred
the admissibility of the proposed expert opinion evidence, and none presents
itself on the evidence led on the
voir dire
.
properly qualified expert
to find that the witness is a properly qualified
expert, the court must be satisfied of two things on a balance of probabilities:
(1)
the witness must have “acquired special or
peculiar knowledge through study or experience in respect of the matters on
which he or she undertakes to testify”;
and
(2)
the witness must be willing and able to
discharge their duty to the court by providing evidence that is impartial,
independent, and unbiased.
the accused concedes that the second requirement
is met in this case. detective constable goch testified that he understands his
duty as an expert, which he stated is to provide fair, objective, impartial
information and assistance to the court. he said that he is able to do so. a
party that opposes the admission of the evidence has the burden of showing that
there is a realistic concern that the expert’s evidence should not be received
because he is unable and/or unwilling to comply with his duty to provide
impartial, independent and unbiased evidence.
the accused did not raise any such concern.
the focus of the accused’s challenge is on the scope
of detective constable goch’s expertise. the threshold for becoming qualified
as an expert is not onerous.
the party calling the expert must simply demonstrate that the expert “acquired
special or peculiar knowledge through study or experience”. as the scc stated
in
r. v. bingley
,
“[t]he basic requirement of expertise for an expert
witness is that the witness has expertise outside the experience and knowledge
of the trier of fact”.
the question is whether detective constable goch meets this requirement. i find
that he does in respect of both cocaine and fentanyl.
detective constable goch
has not previously been qualified by a court to give expert opinion
evidence. this is the first time that the officer has proposed himself as an
expert witness. his
curriculum vitae
is exhibit 2 on the
voir dire.
he was not involved in the investigation of the accused.
detective constable goch has been a police
officer with the hamilton police service since december 2015. he was a police
constable in a uniform capacity until december 2021. in that six-year period, he
estimated that between 20 and 40 percent of his work involved some type of
drug-related incident which might arise from investigating non-drug related matters.
about 5 to 10 percent of his work in uniform patrol was made up specifically of
cdsa
investigations, meaning that it was the primary concern of the
investigation. he gave the examples of a call for service by someone witnessing
drug activity, or a proactive investigation into drug possession or trafficking,
for instance during traffic stops. the
cdsa
investigations involved a
mix of simple possession and possession for the purpose of trafficking.
from january 2022 to september 2023, detective
constable goch was a police constable in the high enforcement action team,
known as the heat unit. he described this as a mix between proactive work and
response to community complaints. detective constable goch testified that the
majority of community complaints were drug-related, “whether it was
crime stoppers or handling informants, receiving information in person”. he estimated that 60 to 80 percent of his work in the heat unit was
cdsa
investigations, close to half of them involving cocaine and about half of them
involving fentanyl.
from october 2023 to present, detective
constable goch has been in the major drugs and gangs unit. the officer said that
the main focus of this unit is a higher level of drug trafficking than what the
heat unit would deal with, as well as weapons possession offences. he testified
that the majority of the work is
cdsa
drug
investigations, estimating it to be about 95 percent of his work, and mostly
involving s. 5(2)
cdsa
offences. again, he said that in major drugs and
gangs about half of the investigations involve cocaine and about half involve
fentanyl. some of the investigations involve both cocaine and fentanyl.
detective constable goch testified that in his
ten years of police work, he has been involved in over 50 arrests for s. 4(1)
cdsa
offences and has participated in
searches incident to these arrests. during these searches, he has located drugs,
observed the quantities of drugs, the ways the drugs were packaged, how they
were separated, the typical weights that they were packaged in, and how the
drugs were concealed. during these s. 4(1)
cdsa
arrests, he had occasion
to locate paraphernalia of use, which oftentimes included burnt tinfoil, glass
pipes, lighters and sometimes needles.
detective constable goch estimated that in the
same ten-year period, he was involved in over 50 arrests for s. 5(2)
cdsa
offences.
he has been involved in the searches incident to arrest for these matters and
estimates that 50 percent of them involved cocaine and 50 percent involved
fentanyl. from these arrests, he was able to observe the quantity of drugs
seized and has learned other things like “the way in which the drugs are
packaged”. he has located indicia of trafficking, such as scales, cutting
agents, and colouring dyes. he testified that weapons are commonly seized when
executing warrants in the major drugs and gangs unit.
in relation to the s. 5(2)
cdsa
arrests,
detective constable goch was asked about the quantity of drugs seized. he
replied, “[t]he smallest is sometimes a point or two, like, 0.1 grams,
very, very small packaging.  up to multiple kilograms at a time”. when asked if
that was for both fentanyl and cocaine, he said: “yes.  the fentanyl is i would
say is more often in the point form.  cocaine is sometimes in a gram or a few
grams, something – still small quantities but not quite 0.1 grams.  up to
multi-kilo level”.
detective constable
goch has debriefed individuals arrested for both s. 4(1) and 5(2)
cdsa
offences.
he has most commonly debriefed users and traffickers of cocaine, fentanyl and
methamphetamine, but also other drugs like prescription pills, heroin and mdma.
from his debriefs with drug traffickers, he has learned, “[a]nything
from the manner in which drugs are trafficked in terms of whether it’s on foot,
doing hand-to-hands, or in a vehicle or how they’re meeting up, the quantities
that they’re typically operating within, the pricing, the lingo and street terminology
that they refer to these drugs as, the i’m not sure if i mentioned packaging
but the way they package their drugs, where that particular user/dealer might
meet the other half to conduct their business, things of that nature”.
in both the heat unit and the major drugs and
gangs unit, detective constable goch has performed tasks which have contributed
to the officer attaining specialized knowledge about drug trafficking in both
cocaine and fentanyl. he has been an affiant for numerous section 11
cdsa
search warrants for both fentanyl and cocaine. he estimated that half of these
warrants involved cocaine and half involved fentanyl. some of the search
warrants involved both substances. while in major drugs and gangs, he has been
an affiant in 8 to 10 cases and been the affiant in 5 to 10 cases in heat.
as an exhibit officer in both units, detective
constable goch has photographed and sometimes created a video of substances
found during the execution of search warrants. he was tasked with going through
the exhibits, categorizing them, and submitting information electronically in
the niche system. when asked by crown counsel what type of information he
learned from acting as an exhibit officer, detective constable goch replied:
you frequently see a variety of different drugs.  not
only do you have your own experience and knowledge of what you believe it to
be, but you also have the searching officers with sometimes less experience,
equal, or more experience than myself and they’re also telling you what they
believe it is, so that kind of gives you some confidence if you’re kind of on
that same page.  so, you’re handling these drugs, you’re seeing the different
textures, the different colours, the way they are packaged, the different,
like, common weights that they’re found together, things of that nature.
while in major drugs and gangs, as an exhibit
officer, he also obtained samples of substances to be sent to health canada for
analysis. he confirmed in his testimony on the
voir dire
that he handled
both cocaine and fentanyl to send samples to health canada and in doing so, he
observed the quantities, how they were packaged and what the drugs looked like.
while in major drugs and gangs, he has been an exhibit officer 8 to 10 times.
in both units, detective constable goch has
handled confidential human sources/informants, obtaining information relating
to the operations of drug dealers, their way of conducting business, their
unique language, and their pricing for buyers and dealers. on the
voir dire
,
detective constable goch testified that from informants he learned about “specific
parties that are dealing drugs, the locations that they’re dealing at, the
average or range of quantities that they typically get involved in, the
pricing, the specific drugs themselves, which drugs they offer for sale,
sometimes the way they’re packaged, if they have, like, a sort of signature or
trademark way of doing it”.
the vast majority of informants he dealt with in the major drugs
and gangs unit were drug traffickers, but he also handled informants who were
users. detective constable goch estimated that 50 percent of the information he
received involved fentanyl and cocaine.
when he has been an officer in charge (oic) for
cdsa
investigations, he has participated in court preparation including
disclosure. he estimated that he was an oic 10 times in the major drugs and
gangs unit and 5 to 10 times in heat. he has conducted surveillance
in various capacities, covertly
observing drug dealers and users to determine their means of conducting
business and lifestyle habits
.
he has been a searching officer,
assisting with the execution of
warrants for residences and vehicles, during which he has located drugs,
weapons, cutting agents, debt lists, cell phones and other items. as a
searching officer,
detective constable goch
has
found cocaine 50 percent of the time and fentanyl 50 percent of the time. in
this role, he has observed how drug dealers conceal, package and store their
product. he has been a searching officer 20 or more times in major drugs and
gangs and between 10 and 20 times in heat.
another task he has performed in both units is
the
review of mobile
device downloads from devices which were seized during the execution of s. 11
cdsa
search warrants. in this role, detective constable goch has gained knowledge
about the conduct of drug dealers including drug trends, pricing and
packaging.  in his testimony at the
voir dire
, the officer
expanded on the knowledge he has gained from reviewing cell phone extractions,
saying that:
…you see the terminology of various drugs, sometimes
you see stuff you don’t necessarily recognize; you have to reach out to whether
it’s coworkers or members.  at that time when i was in the heat unit, sometimes
members in the drug unit with a bit more experience to see what different
terminology and lingo means.  and then you’re also seeing the manner in which
they deal, again, whether it’s setting up a deal at their own house or meeting
in a car.  you also see the pricing that they set for different quantities, you
get a sense of what quantities they most often deal with based on kind of the
pattern that is shown in their messages and pictures.
detective constable goch’s
curriculum vitae
lists numerous courses he has participated in and training he has received. these
courses include introduction to expert witness (ciso) in may 2025 and drug
investigator training (opc) in november 2024. the latter was a two-week course which
provided information on investigating drug trafficking, and included case
studies, warrant drafting, undercover operations, and current trends in the
illicit drug market. detective constable goch testified that the drug
investigator training course covered both cocaine and fentanyl and the drug
trends associated with these substances.
in addition to courses attended, detective constable goch
testified that he expands his knowledge about drugs and drug trafficking almost
daily by consulting with colleagues in both the major drugs and gangs unit and
the heat unit, as well as experts in the area. he said that they frequently talk
about how they are doing investigations or the trends they are seeing, such as what
drugs are most popular at any given time, different packaging methods,
different textures and colours. detective constable goch said that nearly every
time he has these conversations with colleagues, they discuss cocaine and
fentanyl which he said are “two of the most common drugs that we see in the
city”. he said that “speaking about drugs specifically, it keeps us up-to-date
on trends, pricing, investigative techniques, other experiences…”.
in cross-examination, defence counsel asked detective constable
goch how often he would talk to other hamilton drug officers who have provided
expert testimony to ask them specific questions that would impact his ability
to provide the opinion evidence he seeks to give in this case. detective
constable goch said this would happen weekly.
when pressed by defence counsel who asked whether these were “like
a tutorial”, detective constable goch expanded on the types of discussions he
would have with other officers. for instance, if an officer was assigned to do
an expert report: “it’s very common that somebody says, ‘oh, yeah, i have an
expert that came up for kind of this set of circumstances, this is what i’m
thinking’”. this evidence displays a willingness on the part of detective
constable goch to expand his knowledge base and ensure that he and other
officers remain knowledgeable and informed on current trends. based on the
totality of detective constable goch’s evidence, i remain satisfied that,
although he consults with other officers, he is willing and able to provide the
court with his independent, impartial and unbiased opinions, supported by his
training and experience and not strictly the input of others.
detective constable goch gave evidence that
personal observations he has made while, for instance, acting as an exhibit
officer, are consistent with information he has learned in courses, in
discussions he has had with other officers about their cocaine and fentanyl
drug trafficking cases, and information he has received when debriefing users
and traffickers about cocaine and fentanyl.
detective constable goch has been designated by the
hamilton police service training branch as an approved instructor for the drug
presentation seminar for groups of new hps recruits, hamilton ems paramedics
and for youth in community outreach programs.
i find that detective constable goch has the
requisite level of knowledge to testify and provide expert opinion evidence of
the nature and scope proposed by the crown for both cocaine and fentanyl. he
has gained knowledge through personal work experiences, debriefs of drug users
and traffickers, handling of confidential human sources/informants, attendance
at courses and conversations with fellow drug officers and drug experts. the
knowledge he has accumulated is outside the knowledge and experience of this
court.
defence counsel’s challenge to detective
constable goch’s qualifications focused on dissecting the tasks he performed and
courses he attended individually, saying that certain tasks and courses would
not assist him in providing the case-specific evidence he is being asked to
give in the accused’s case. for instance, being an affiant for a search warrant
would not assist with gaining knowledge about pricing and packaging of fentanyl
or cocaine. with respect, it is necessary to consider the officer's
training and experience holistically to determine whether he is qualified to
give the proposed expert evidence.  having done so, i find that he is a
properly qualified expert in the areas delineated by crown counsel.
discretionary gatekeeping
at the second discretionary gatekeeping step, “the
judge balances the potential risks and benefits of admitting the evidence in
order to decide whether the potential benefits justify the risks”.
in
white burgess,
the
scc said this about the case-specific cost-benefit analysis that happens at
this stage:
the required balancing exercise has been described in
various ways. in
mohan,
sopinka j. spoke of the “reliability versus
effect factor” (p. 21), while in
j.(j.-l.)
, binnie j. spoke about
“relevance, reliability and necessity” being “measured against the counterweights
of consumption of time, prejudice and confusion”: para 47. doherty j.a. summed
it up well in
abbey
, stating that the “trial judge must decide whether
expert evidence that meets the preconditions to admissibility is sufficiently
beneficial to the trial process to warrant its admission despite the potential
harm to the trial process that may flow from the admission of the expert
evidence”: para. 76.
despite satisfying the
mohan
criteria,
the proposed expert evidence may still be ruled inadmissible where its
probative value is outweighed by its prejudicial effect. the scc put it this way
in
white burgess
:
at this point, relevance, necessity, reliability and
absence of bias can helpfully be seen as part of a sliding scale where a basic
level must first be achieved in order to meet the admissibility threshold and
thereafter continue to play a role in weighing the overall competing
considerations in admitting the evidence.
in
abbey
, justice doherty explained the
“benefit” and “cost” sides of the analysis as follows:
the “benefit” side of the
cost-benefit evaluation requires a consideration of the probative potential of
the evidence and the significance of the issue to which the evidence is
directed. when one looks to potential probative value, one must consider the
reliability of the evidence. reliability concerns reach not only the subject
matter of the evidence, but also the methodology used by the proposed expert in
arriving at his or her opinion, the expert’s expertise and the extent to which
the expert is shown to be impartial and objective.
….
the “cost” side of the ledger addresses the various
risks inherent in the admissibility of expert opinion evidence, described
succinctly by binnie j. in
j.(j.-l.)
at para. 47 as “consumption of
time, prejudice and confusion”. clearly, the most important risk is the danger
that a jury will be unable to make an effective and critical assessment of the
evidence. the complexity of the material underlying the opinion, the expert’s
impressive credentials, the impenetrable jargon in which the opinion is wrapped
and the cross-examiner’s inability to expose the opinion’s shortcomings may
prevent an effective evaluation of the evidence by the jury. there is a risk
that a jury faced with a well presented firm opinion may abdicate its
fact-finding role on the understandable assumption that a person labelled as an
expert by the trial judge knows more about his or her area of expertise than do
the individual members of the jury:
j.(j.-l.)
at para. 25.
justice doherty went onto say this about the need
to consider whether the expert evidence is necessary at this gatekeeper stage
of the admissibility inquiry:
the cost-benefit analysis demands a consideration of
the extent to which the proffered opinion evidence is necessary to a proper
adjudication of the fact(s) to which that evidence is directed. in
mohan,
sopinka j. describes necessity as a separate criterion governing admissibility.
i see the necessity analysis as a part of the larger cost-benefit analysis
performed by the trial judge. in relocating the necessity analysis, i do not,
however, depart from the role assigned to necessity by the
mohan
criteria.
the proffered evidence is relevant to the issue
at the very core of the case which is the reason for which the accused was in
possession of the fentanyl and cocaine. the evidence detective constable goch
will give is reliable in the sense that it has been attained by various means
including professional experience, training and consultation with colleagues
and the defence concedes that he is able and willing to give impartial,
independent and unbiased evidence. the evidence is necessary as it is outside
the knowledge and experience of the court. the costs associated with receiving
the evidence do not outweigh the benefits in receiving it. the testimony of
detective constable goch will not consume undue trial time and is not complex.
this type of evidence is routinely received in cases where the central issue is
possession versus possession for the purpose of trafficking.
conclusion
detective constable goch is permitted to testify
as an expert in relation to cocaine and fentanyl drug trafficking generally, and
specifically pricing, quantity, street terminology and language, consumption
habits of users, purchase patterns, conduct of drug trafficking and indicia of
trafficking.
released:  november 26, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
during submissions, crown counsel, ms. ormond, conceded that storage habits of
drug traffickers is not relevant in the context of the accused’s case and is
perhaps subsumed in the conduct of drug trafficking.
r. v. abbey
,
2009 onca 624
, at para.
71
.
modern criminal evidence,
matthew gourlay, brock jones, jill makepeace,
glen crisp, justice renee pomerance,
toronto, ont.: emond montgomery
publications limited,
2022, chapter 4
, pp. 93-94. see
r. v. mohan
, 1994
scc 80, at paras. 17-21. where an opinion is based on contested science or on
science being used for a novel purpose, a fifth threshold requirement must be established,
which is that the
underlying science
is sufficiently reliable for that
purpose. this fifth threshold requirement has no applicability to the accused’s
case.
white burgess langille inman v. abbott and haliburton co.
,
2015 scc 23
,
at paras.
16 and 24
.
r. v. abbey
,
2009 onca 624
,
at para.
82
.
r. v. j. (j.-l.)
,
2000 scc 51
, at para.
47
, citing d.m. paciocco and l.
stuesser,
the law of evidence
(1996), at p. 19.
ibid,
at para. 47.
r. v. mohan, supra,
at para. 26, citing
r. v. abbey,
1982 canlii 25 (scc)
, 2
s.c.r. 24.
r. v mohan, supra,
at para. 26.
r. v. d.(d.)
,
2000 scc 43
, at para.
21
.
ibid,
at para. 47, citing
j. sopinka, s. n.
lederman and a. w. bryant,
the law of evidence in canada
(2nd ed. 1999),
at p. 620.
r. v. bryan
(2003)
,
2003 canlii 24337 (on ca)
, 175 c.c.c. (3d) 285, o.j. no. 1960
(ont. c.a.).
the authors of
modern criminal evidence, supra,
at p. 98, note that “[m]ost,
if not all, expert opinions are based in part on hearsay evidence in the form
of academic sources, out-of-court interviews, and other second hand information
that may never be tested in court”, and that, “[a]lthough the exclusionary
hearsay rule
may
be invoked to limit an opinion based on such evidence, in
almost all cases this information will find its way before the trier of fact based
on the principle that if an expert is allowed to give their opinion, they ought
to also be permitted to give the circumstances upon which that opinion is
based”. hearsay that forms the basis of the expert’s expertise are “considered
part of the tools of the trade of the expert, including knowledge that comes
from secondary sources, such as books and articles, as well as from attending
lectures and interacting with colleagues”: see
r. v. lavallee
,
1990 canlii 95 (scc)
, 1
s.c.r. 852, at 898-99;
r. v. sheriffe
,
2015 onca 880
, at para.
113
.
r. v. mohan, supra,
at para. 31.
white burgess langille inman v. abbott and haliburton co.
,
supra.
ibid
, at paras. 47-49.
qualifying and challenging expert evidence,
eric v. gottardi, jennifer
a. maclellan, michael lacy, and robin flumerfelt, emond montgomery
publications limited, 2022, toronto, on, chapter 3, p. 53.
r. v. bingley
,
2017 scc 12
, at para.
19
.
white burgess langille inman v. abbott and haliburton co.
,
supra
,
at para.
24
.
ibid,
at para. 24.
ibid,
at para. 54.
r. v. abbey
,
2009 onca 624
,
at paras.
87 and 90
.
ibid
, at para. 93.