citation:
r.
v. benjamin
, 2025 oncj 129
date:  2025·03·07
court
file no.: toronto region 4815 998 23 48119658
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his majesty  the  king
—  and  —
kaleb  benjamin
before
justice david porter
heard
on july 23, 2024 and february 25, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on march 7, 2025
a. ahmed and s. virani.............................................................................................
for the crown
m. skikavich.....................................................................................................
for kaleb benjamin
porter j.
overview
kaleb benjamin (mr. benjamin) plead guilty to count 1 in an
information which charged that on or about the 5
th
day of september
2023 at the city of toronto he trafficked in a schedule i substance, namely
fentanyl, contrary to section 5(2) of the
controlled l drugs and substances
act
.
by agreement, all of the facts in relation to a total of 4
instances of trafficking in fentanyl to an undercover police officer between
september 5, 2023 and october 11, 2023 are to be taken into account in
determining the appropriate sentence on count 1 to which mr. benjamin plead
guilty.
mr. benjamin was born on october 3, 2002, so he was 20, on
september 5, 2023, when he committed the trafficking in count 1 which was the
subject of the plea.
the amounts of fentanyl sold to the undercover officer were
as follows:
september
5, 2023 - 9.48 grams for $300
september
12, 2023 - 6.43 grams for $300
september
22, 2023 - 3.38 grams for $300
october
11, 2023 - 3.54 grams for $300.
mr. benjamin had no prior adult or youth criminal record.  he
had just turned 21 shortly before the last sale of fentanyl to the undercover
officer on october 11, 2023.
following a judicial pretrial, mr. benjamin entered an early
plea of guilty on july 23, 2024 and the matter was adjourned for sentencing
submissions which were heard on february 25, 2025.
background of mr. benjamin
a very thorough presentence report dated september 16, 2024
was filed in evidence.  it reports that mr. benjamin had an unstable childhood.
he is a young black man whose parents never married nor did they ever live
together.  he was raised by his maternal grandmother and mother during his
formative years and moved frequently back and forth between his mother’s home
in louisiana and his father’s home in toronto in a continuing pattern until the
age of 18.
as a young child, he was exposed to domestic violence between
his mother and her then partner.  he suffered trauma as a result of observing
that domestic violence.
by the age of 17, he began to live with his father and his
paternal grandmother, and developed negative behaviour by associating with criminal
peers.  he lacked structure and parental supervision which contributed to an
unstable home environment.
mr. benjamin lived in toronto with his father and paternal
grandmother at a time when his father struggled with drug addiction.  his
father and paternal grandmother were evicted from their home leaving them with
nowhere to live.  counsel advises that mr. benjamin was homeless at the time of
his trafficking offence.
mr. benjamin last attended grade 11 at a secondary school in
toronto and quit his academic studies at the age of 17 during the height of the
covid pandemic.  he struggled with school as he had been diagnosed with adhd
but had not followed through with medication prescribed for this condition.
during his teenage years and at the time that he committed
his trafficking offence, he used opioids and had become addicted to percocet.  according
to the presentence report, at the time of this offence, he was desperate for
money while continuing to suffer from his percocet addiction.  it reports that
he last used opioids shortly before his offence.  mr. benjamin stated to the
court that he is now drug free.
mr. benjamin’s progress while on bail
mr. benjamin has been on a very strict house arrest bail
since october 2023, a period of 16 months.  he has had no new charges, and no
alleged violations of his strict bail conditions.
at the time of the presentence report in september 2024, it
was reported that mr. benjamin was currently employed full-time working
remotely at home as a call centre agent monday to friday 9:00 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.
while he was laid off for a period of time for not meeting the company’s sales
quotas, he was eventually rehired by the same employer.
as noted in the presentence report, mr. benjamin enrolled in
the substance abuse program for african canadian youths offered by cafcan
social services starting july 10, 2024 with weekly counselling sessions.
mr. benjamin has pursued counselling through cafcan social services.
a report from his program worker krystal clear harvey dated november 15,2024
is extremely favourable.  it reports that mr. benjamin regularly attended his
counselling sessions with a positive attitude and engaging spirit.  it reports
that he was open and thoroughly discussed his history of trauma and its impact
on him.  the report said he demonstrated his desire to continue on a positive
path, that he would like to continue with regular counselling and that he is
open to submitting regular urine tests.
a letter from the apprenticeship administrator of labourers
international union (liuna) local 506, training centre dated february 5, 2025
confirmed that mr. benjamin successfully completed the hazardous materials
worker apprenticeship program that took place from november 11 to december 13, 2024,
a period of five weeks.  the classes ran five days a week and six hours per
day.  the report notes that as he has completed this current training program,
he is currently waiting to get dispatched to work.
social supports
mr. benjamin currently resides with his father and his
father’s partner, ms. sabrina debeau, who was his surety.  ms. debeau reported
to the presentence report author that she had seen a positive change and big
growth in mr. benjamin, especially in the last six months prior to the report
of september 2024.  the presentence report author states at page 8:
“presently, the subject
resides with his father and his surety ms. sabrina debeau, with no plans to
reside elsewhere after his sentencing.  to his benefit, it appears the subject
has substantial support from ms. debeau, who is capable of motivating the
subject, assisting him with future employment and providing added structure to
his life.  the subject’s responsiveness, coupled with positive relationships
with family and friends, will allow him to achieve his goals.  moreover the
subject appears to have the motivation to contribute to society in a positive
way given that securing a career is an important goal the subject wishes to
focus on.”
the presentence report notes that mr benjamin “accepts full
responsibility and expresses remorse.  his insight into his actions shows an
understanding of the consequences of such negative behaviour.”  the presentence
report concludes that should the court consider community supervision as a part
of its disposition “it would appear that the offender is a suitable candidate”.
mr. benjamin’s statement to the court
at the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, mr. benjamin
expressed his sincere remorse for having committed this offence.  he expressed
his sincere determination to continue pursuing a prosocial life, never
offending again, assisted by a new relationship with a partner, who works as a
nurse, which provides him with motivation and support.  he told the court that
he has surrounded himself with good role models and has taken active steps to
start a career in the trades by completing the necessary training.
the position of the parties
the crown accepts the numerous mitigating circumstances in
this case resulting from the significant efforts mr. benjamin has made to adopt
a prosocial life and achieve significant rehabilitation while living under
strict house arrest for a period of 16 months.  the crown also acknowledges the
mitigating effect of the absence of any criminal record for mr. benjamin, and
his status as a youthful first offender.
however, the crown submits that the seriousness of the four
instances of trafficking fentanyl, in the amounts trafficked in this case,
requires that a penitentiary sentence of three years be imposed, after giving a
credit of six months
duncan
credit to reflect the strict house arrest
release conditions which mr. benjamin has had for 16 months.  the crown also
requests a dna order, a s.109 weapons prohibition and a forfeiture order.
the defence submits that, having regard to mr. benjamin’s
youthful age, the absence of any prior record, and the extraordinary steps he
has taken to pursue counselling, take specific employment training, comply with
16 months of strict house arrest with no alleged breaches, as a racialized
youthful first offender a conditional sentence of two years less a day with
house arrest would meet all of the applicable sentencing principles.
the law
the principles of sentencing
section 10 of the
controlled drugs and substances act
states:
“purpose of sentencing
section 10(1)
without restricting the
generality of the
criminal code
, the fundamental purpose of any sentence
for an offence under this part is to contribute to the respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society while encouraging
rehabilitation, and treatment in appropriate circumstances, of offenders and
acknowledging the harm done to victims and to the community.”
the general principles of sentencing are established in the
following provisions of the
criminal code
.
section 718
states:
“the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful
conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by
unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender, and
other persons, from committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from
society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating
offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm
done to victims, or to the community; and
(f)  to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or
to the community”
section 718.2 states:
“a court that imposes a
sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles:
(
a
) a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, ….
(
b
) a sentence
should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances;
(
c
) where
consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly
long or harsh;
(
d
) an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(
e
) all available
sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the circumstances
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.”
the fundamental principle of sentencing is the principle of
proportionality.
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
states that a
sentence, “must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender”.
in
r. v. ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
, the supreme court of
canada defined the principle of proportionality as follows at para. 37:
“the fundamental principle
of sentencing (i.e., proportionality) is intimately tied to the fundamental
purpose of sentencing — the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society
through the imposition of just sanctions.  whatever weight a judge may wish to
accord to the various objectives and other principles listed in the
code
,
the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental principle of
proportionality.  proportionality is the
sine qua non
of a just
sanction.  first, the principle ensures that a sentence reflects the gravity of
the offence.  this is closely tied to the objective of denunciation.  it
promotes justice for victims and ensures public confidence in the justice
system.  as wilson j. expressed in her concurring judgment in
re b.c.
motor vehicle act
,
1985 canlii 81 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 486, at p. 533:
“it is basic to any theory
of punishment that the sentence imposed bear some relationship to the offence;
it must be a “fit” sentence proportionate to the seriousness of the offence.
only if this is so can the public be satisfied that the offender “deserved” the
punishment he received and feel a confidence in the fairness and rationality of
the system.
second, the principle of
proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what is appropriate,
given the moral blameworthiness of the offender.  in this sense, the principle
serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures justice for the
offender.  in the canadian criminal justice system, a just sanction is one that
reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not elevate one at the
expense of the other.”
in its decision on the appropriate sentence for large scale
commercial trafficking in fentanyl,
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
, the
supreme court of canada reaffirmed the importance of the principle of
proportionality in sentencing.  the majority stated at paragraphs 10 and 12:
“the goal in every case is
a fair, fit and principled sanction.  proportionality is the organizing
principle in reaching this goal.  unlike other principles of sentencing set out
in the
criminal code
, proportionality stands alone following the heading
“fundamental principle” (
s. 718.1
).  accordingly, “[a]ll sentencing starts with
the principle that sentences must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender” (
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at para.
30
).  the principles of parity and individualization,
while important, are secondary principles.
….
as to the relationship of individualization
to proportionality and parity, this court in
lacasse
aptly observed:
proportionality is
determined both on an individual basis, that is, in relation to the accused him
or herself and to the offence committed by the accused, and by comparison with
sentences imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
[para. 53]  individualization is central to the proportionality assessment.
whereas the gravity of a particular offence may be relatively constant, each
offence is “committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a unique
profile” (para. 58).  this is why proportionality sometimes demands a sentence
that has never been imposed in the past for a similar offence.  the question is
always whether the sentence reflects the gravity of the offence, the offender’s
degree of responsibility and the unique circumstances of each case (para. 58).”
in ontario, the court of appeal has provided explicit
guidance on the significance of drug addiction as an individualizing factor in
sentencing for drug trafficking.
in
r. v. c.n.h.,
2002 canlii 7751 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 4918, rosenberg j.a.
stated at para. 31:
“... the importance of s.
10 [of the
controlled drugs and substances act]
is to encourage courts
to recognize the particular problem that in many cases persons convicted of
drug offences are themselves victims of the drug culture and dependent upon
drugs as addicts or users.  i think s. 10 recognizes a view that had become increasingly
prevalent that, especially for the addict trafficker, the public interest --
including the protection of the public -- is best served by the treatment and
rehabilitation of the offender.”
indeed, as
noted by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
, at para.
4
:
“
one
of the main objectives of canadian criminal law is the rehabilitation of
offenders.  rehabilitation is one of the fundamental moral values that
distinguish canadian society from the societies of many other nations in the
world, and it helps the courts impose sentences that are just and appropriate.”
the sentencing principle of rehabilitation is important when
sentencing a youthful first offender.
the court of appeal has stressed the principle of restraint
in imposing a custodial sentence on a youthful first offender.  as gillese j.a.
stated in
r. v. batisse,
2009 onca 114 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 452 at paras.
32-34
:
“ the principle of
restraint operates in three ways in the present case.  first, it is an
important consideration because the appellant was a first offender.  as such,
the restraint principle requires that the sentencing judge consider all
sanctions apart from incarceration and where, as here, incarceration must be
imposed, the term should be as short as possible and tailored to the individual
circumstances of the accused: see
r. v. priest
(1996),
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
, 30 o.r. (3d) 538,
o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.), at p. 545 o.r. [page 651]
second, the principle of restraint requires the sentencing judge to consider
rehabilitation in determining the appropriate length of the sentence.  in
lowering a sentence given to a first offender, this court stated in
r. v.
blanas
,
2006 canlii 2610 (on ca)
, o.j. no.
364, 207 o.a.c. 226 (c.a.), at para.
5
:
[g]eneral deterrence cannot
be the sole consideration.  the appellant is relatively youthful and has no
prior record and appears to have the full support of her family and community.
appropriate consideration must be given to the rehabilitation of the appellant.
in
serious cases and cases involving violence, rehabilitation alone is not the
determinative factor -- general deterrence and denunciation are also
significant factors to be considered.  however, as this court ruled in
r. v.
dubinsky
, o.j. no. 862,
2005 canlii 5668 (c.a.)
, at para.
1
, it is an error to focus almost
exclusively on general deterrence and fail to consider individual deterrence
and rehabilitation, especially when sentencing a first offender.”
the court of appeal has recently summarized and re-stated the
importance of principles of restraint and rehabilitation in sentencing youthful
first offenders convicted of serious crimes, such as crimes of violence, in
which denunciation and general deterrence are important sentencing principles.
in
r. v habib
,
2024 onca 830
, chief justice tulloch stated at paras.
29-36:
“   the
appellant also argues that the sentencing judge overlooked some of the
principles governing sentencing youthful adult offenders for their first
criminal offence.  i agree.  he did not apply these principles because he
incorrectly assumed that the gravity of the offence rendered them secondary.
the
courts respect the need to hold young adults accountable for serious crimes
that, like the ones the appellant committed, involve significant personal
violence.  the courts must denounce the actions of young adults who commit
these offences and impose sentences that, to the extent possible, adequately
deter them from reoffending. general deterrence also gains importance.
due to these offences’ gravity and public safety risks, significant prison
terms may be necessary.  it is not always possible to avoid incarceration,
impose only a very short prison term, or select a sentence at the low end of
the range.
see
r. v. jackson
(2002),
2002 canlii 41524 (on ca)
, 58 o.r. (3d) 593
(c.a.), at para.
60
;
r. v. borde
(2003),
2003 canlii 4187 (on ca)
, 63 o.r. (3d) 417
(c.a.), at para.
37
; and
r. v. brown
,
2015 onca 361
, 126 o.r. (3d) 797, at
paras.
4-5 and 9
.  these principles may help
prevent older, more sophisticated perpetrators and organized criminal groups
from preying on and recruiting young adults to commit violent crimes on the
theory that those young adults will not be imprisoned if apprehended.  see
r.
v. ahmed
,
2017 onca 76
, 136 o.r. (3d) 403, at
para.
65
;
r. v. hamilton
(2004),
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca)
, 72 o.r. (3d) 1
(c.a.), at para.
147
.
sentencing
judges must also respect several other settled principles when sentencing
youthful offenders for their first criminal offence.  first, they must practice
restraint.  this requires them to avoid imprisoning young adults when possible.
when imprisonment is necessary, it also requires them to make the sentence as
short as possible to achieve the principles and objectives of sentencing.  see
priest
,
at pp. 544-546.  second, they must prioritize rehabilitation as the paramount
sentencing objective.
where
necessary, they must also prioritize specific deterrence.  see
brown
,
at paras.
5 and 10
.  third, they cannot focus
exclusively on denunciation and general deterrence or elevate those objectives
above rehabilitation and specific deterrence. see
borde
, at
para.
36
;
brown
, at para.
7
.  fourth, they must consider young
adults’ reduced moral culpability and the harsher impact that incarceration
causes them due to their stage of life.  see
r. v. hills
,
2023 scc 2
, 477 d.l.r. (4th) 1, at
paras.
161 and 165
;
r. v. bertrand
marchand
,
2023 scc 26
, 487 d.l.r. (4th) 201, at
paras.
132 and 152
.
sentencing
judges must always give serious and sufficient consideration to all these
principles.  merely referring to them as relevant is not always sufficient to
show their proper application. failing to apply or unreasonably
underemphasizing them is an error in principle. see
ijam
, at
para.
52
;
r. v. faroughi
,
2024 onca 178
, 435 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at
para.
81
.
the
courts have long followed these principles because they protect society, which
parliament has made the fundamental purpose of sentencing.  because young
adults are still maturing, they have “high rehabilitative prospects.” see
bertrand
marchand
, at para.
152
.  often, the shock of arrest and
conviction is a turning point that leads them to reflect on their actions,
avoid crime, and choose a pro-social path. prioritizing rehabilitation thus
helps protect society by preventing reoffending. see
r. v. swann
,
o.j. no. 137 (c.a.)
, at para. 4
;
r.
v. dunkley
,
o.j. no. 1663 (c.a.)
,
at para. 4
; and
r. v. demeter and whitmore
(1976),
1976 canlii 1413 (on ca)
, 32 c.c.c. (2d)
379 (ont. c.a.), at pp. 381-382.
in
contrast, crushing sentences can endanger society by “harden[ing]” young
defendants into an anti-social path.  see
r. v. desir
,
2021 onca 486
, at paras.
32 and 47
; see also
dunkley
,
at para. 4.  unfortunately, despite the best efforts of correctional
authorities, prisons sometimes struggle to rehabilitate young adults.  see
hills
,
at para.
165
.  instead, they can become a “finishing
school” for crime because they may contain bad influences to which impressionable
young adults are vulnerable, such as drugs, gangs, bullying, violence, and
negative peers and mentors who share anti-social values and criminal
experience.  see
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5
, 1 s.c.r. 61, at
para.
16
; see also
hills
, at
para.
165
; and
r. v. wismayer
(1997),
1997 canlii 3294 (on ca)
, 33 o.r. (3d) 225
(c.a.), at pp. 242-243.
these
principles also respect parliament’s direction to impose proportionate
sentences.  as
hamilton
held
, at para.
91
, proportionality requires courts to
consider factors that “decrease the offender’s personal responsibility.”  for
young adults, immaturity is one such factor.  while as adults they are morally
responsible for their actions, “[f]ull maturity and all the attributes of
adulthood are not magically conferred on young [adults] on their 18th
birthdays.”  see
r. v. clarke
, ewca crim 185, 1 cr.
app. r. (s.) 52, at para. 5.  instead, young adults are more impulsive,
emotionally volatile, and susceptible to negative influences and bad judgment.
this can make them less blameworthy than more mature adults. see
r. v.
scott
,
2015 abca 99
, 28 alta. l.r. (6th) 78, at
para.
13
;
fournier c. r.
,
2012 qcca 1330
, at paras.
42-45
. by accounting for immaturity, courts
ensure that turning 18 “does not present a cliff edge for … sentencing.”
see
clarke
, at para. 5; see also
bertrand marchand
,
at para.
132
;
r. v. leask
(1996),
1996 canlii 17936 (mb ca)
, 113 man. r. (2d)
265 (c.a.), at para.
3
.
proportionality
also requires considering the greater impact of incarceration on young adults.  see
hills
,
at para.
135
.  incarceration disrupts a transitional
stage where they should be “developing … job prospects and relationships that
provide the base for a productive life” and learning pro-social skills and
values from positive mentors and peers.  see
r. v. hutchings
,
2012 nlca 2
, 316 nfld. &. p.e.i.r. 211,
at para.
107
.  each year is felt more keenly during
this critical period of transition.  see
r. v. lai
,
2006 bcca 368
, 229 b.c.a.c. 236, at
para.
104
.”
the crown cases
in his very fair and able submissions, crown counsel
acknowledges the substantial mitigating factors in this case, including the
very young age of mr. benjamin (20 turning 21) at the time of his sales of
fentanyl to the undercover officer, the absence of any prior criminal record,
the traumatic and challenging circumstances of his youth, and the significant
gains mr. benjamin has made in pursuing training for employment, counselling
for his underlying trauma, and compliance with strict house arrest bail and no
further allegations of criminal behaviour over the past 16 months.
nevertheless, the crown submits that a penitentiary sentence
is required to give effect to the primary principles of denunciation and
general deterrence, having regard to the extremely dangerous nature of fentanyl
and the amount mr. benjamin trafficked in the 4 transactions to be taken into
account in this sentencing.
the crown relies upon the recent decision in
r. v. ahmed
,
2024 onsc 6664
, and
r. v. lynch
,
2022 onca 109
, while noting that there
are precedents such as
r. v. brockington
,
o.j. no. 5159
in which
conditional sentences for trafficking in fentanyl by youthful first offenders
have been imposed.  the crown submits that it is principally the quantity of
fentanyl sold by mr. benjamin to the undercover officer which makes a
conditional sentence in this case an inappropriate balancing of the aggravating
and mitigating factors which must be considered in imposing a fit sentence.
defence counsel notes the exceptional mitigating
circumstances in this case, and notes that in exceptional circumstances courts
have imposed conditional sentences for trafficking fentanyl where the
individualized circumstances of the offender make it a fit sentence
proportionate to the culpability of the offender and the seriousness of the
offence.
defence counsel submits that each of the cases involving
actual incarceration relied upon by the crown are distinguishable from the case
before the court.
in r. v. ahmed, supra
, the offender had no prior
record, sold a total of 10.77 grams of fentanyl to an undercover officer in 3
transactions, the last being for 6.98 grams for $750.  however, the offender
was 30 years old at the time of the offence, not a youthful first offender.  upon
arrest, he was in possession of a further 2.24 grams of fentanyl and a digital
scale.
in
r. v. ahmed, supra
, the court stated at para. 30:
“in the circumstances of
this case, i agree with the crown that three years is at the lower end of the
appropriate range.  as observed by nakatsuru j.in
r. v. lawal
,
2024 onsc
3621
, at para.
27
, a penitentiary sentence is required even with mitigating
factors.”
in
r. v. lawal
, supra,
justice nakatsuru acknowledged
that exceptionally conditional sentences can be given for fentanyl trafficking.
in that case the offender was convicted of trafficking in fentanyl on 3 occasions,
and was also found to be in possession of multiple cell phones, 30.96 grams of
fentanyl in 6 separate baggies, along with scales and plastic packaging. he was
convicted of 3 counts of trafficking in fentanyl and  1 count of possession of
fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking.
justice nakatsuru held that a period of actual incarceration
was required principally because the 22-year old offender in that case, who was
not an addict, not only sold fentanyl, but was found to be in possession of 30.96
grams of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. he stated at paragraph 27 of
that case:
“while ranges can be
departed from and conditional sentences can be exceptionally given for fentanyl
trafficking, i am not persuaded that the circumstances in your case justify it.
the multiple trafficking and the possession of an ounce of fentanyl for the
purpose of trafficking charges, despite all the mitigating factors, requires a
penitentiary sentence.”
the crown also relies on the decision of the court of appeal
in
r. v. lynch
,
2022 onca 109
.  in that case, the court of appeal cited
a number of errors of law by the trial judge and substituted a six-year
sentence for the four years imposed at trial for the 29-year-old accused
convicted of trafficking fentanyl.  the facts are significantly different in
that case than the case at bar as the accused was 29 years of age at the time
of the offence, and sold an undercover officer fentanyl or cocaine on six
occasions accepting responsibility for a total of 965.01 g of cocaine, 149.28 grams
of mdma and 41.37 grams of fentanyl. the crown had sought a sentence of 10
years at trial.
the crown notes the decision of justice bliss in
r. v.
brockington
,
o.j. no. 159
, in which an addict fentanyl trafficker
who sold 3.5 grams of fentanyl to an undercover officer for $750 was sentenced
to a two years less a day conditional sentence with house arrest for the entire
period of the conditional sentence, principally based upon the fact that the
accused had taken exceptional steps to overcome his addiction, was 23 years
old at the time of the offence, had a tumultuous childhood, trafficked to
support his addiction, and had no prior criminal record.
analysis
the offence of trafficking in fentanyl is an extremely
serious offence.  the act of trafficking fentanyl, an extremely dangerous and
addictive drug, exposes members of the public to grave risk and causes
significant harm to our communities:
r. v. campbell,
2024 scc 42
at para.
132
;
r. v. ahmed, supra
, at paras. 23-24.
a proportionate sentence for trafficking fentanyl must give
significant emphasis to denunciation and general and specific deterrence in
light of the gravity of any offence involving trafficking in fentanyl.
however, it is also appropriate to bear in mind that a
properly structured conditional sentence can satisfy the sentencing objectives
of deterrence and denunciation.  as stated by lamer c.j. in
r. v.
proulx
,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
at para.
22
:
“the conditional sentence incorporates some elements of non-custodial
measures and some others of incarceration.  because it is served in the
community, it will generally be more effective than incarceration at achieving
the restorative objectives of rehabilitation, reparations to the victim and
community, and the promotion of a sense of responsibility in the
offender.  however,
it is also a punitive sanction capable of
achieving the objectives of denunciation and deterrence
.  it is this
punitive aspect that distinguishes the conditional sentence from probation,
…..”
in
r. v. proulx
, supra
, the court rejected a
presumption against conditional sentences for certain categories of offences.
lamer c.j. stated at paras. 79, 81 and 83:
“79
thus, a conditional sentence is
available in principle for
all
offences in which the statutory
prerequisites are satisfied….
81   in my view, while the gravity of such
offences is clearly relevant to determining whether a conditional sentence is
appropriate in the circumstances, it would be both unwise and unnecessary to
establish judicially created presumptions that conditional sentences are
inappropriate for specific offences.  offence-specific presumptions
introduce unwarranted rigidity in the determination of whether a conditional
sentence is a just and appropriate sanction.  such presumptions do not
accord with the principle of proportionality set out in s. 718.1 and the value
of individualization in sentencing, nor are they necessary to achieve the
important objectives of uniformity and consistency in the use of conditional
sentences.
83    my difficulty with the suggestion
that the proportionality principle presumptively excludes certain offences from
the conditional sentencing regime is that such an approach focuses inordinately
on the gravity of the offence and insufficiently on the moral blameworthiness
of the offender.  this fundamentally misconstrues the nature of the
principle.  proportionality requires that
full consideration
be
given to both factors.  as s. 718.1 provides:
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and
the
degree of responsibility of the offender.” [emphasis added.]”
section 742.1 sets out the statutory pre-conditions for the
availability of a conditional sentence. it states in part:
“if a person is convicted
of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two
years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the offender’s behaviour
in the community, order that the offender serve the sentence in the community,
subject to the conditions imposed under section 742.3, if
(a) the court is satisfied
that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety
of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
(b) the offence is not an
offence punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment…..
sentencing jurisprudence in ontario has recognized that a
proportionate sentence for a youthful first offender trafficking in fentanyl
may, in appropriate circumstances, involve the imposition of a conditional
sentence.
in
r. v. shearer
,
2022 oncj 288
, a 20-month
conditional sentence, with full house arrest and 100 hours of community service
was imposed on a 22-year old addict first offender who sold .43 grams of
fentanyl to an undercover police officer for $100, and was found with 2.84
grams of fentanyl in his home.  the accused in that case had made substantial
efforts to overcome his addiction while on bail.
in
r. v. gordon
,
2023 oncj 157
, justice silverstein
imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a day, with house arrest for
15 months, on a plea to possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking.  the
accused was observed by police engaging in three hand-to-hand suspected drug
transactions over 30 minutes.  the police approached the accused and arrested
him, and found 53 packages of fentanyl and individual bags and 73 packages of
crack cocaine on his person.  he had prior convictions involving a property
offence and fail to comply with a recognizance in 2007, and a conviction for
possession of a schedule i substance in 2009.  he had a traumatic youth and had
become an addict trafficking to support his addiction.  before sentencing, he
had taken drug treatment, become drug-free for six months, and developed a solid
record of employment.
as previously noted, justice bliss in
r. v. brockington, supra
,
imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a day on an addict trafficker
who sold 3.5 g of fentanyl to an undercover officer for $750.
in
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
, at para.
58
, wagner j.
stated:
“there will always be
situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range: although
ensuring parity is in itself a desirable objective, the fact that each crime is
committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile cannot
be disregarded. the determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a
highly individualized exercise that involves a variety of factors that are
difficult to define with precision.  this is why it may happen that a sentence
that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may never have
been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit.  once
again, everything depends upon the gravity of the offence, the offender’s
degree of responsibility, and the circumstances of each case.”
following the recent authoritative statements from our court
of appeal in
r. v.
habib
,
supra,
i accept that for a
youthful first offender, even one who has committed a serious offence such as
trafficking in fentanyl, the paramount sentencing principles of general and
specific deterrence and denunciation must be carefully balanced with  restraint
and rehabilitation, in order to achieve a sentence which is proportionate to
both the gravity of the offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender.
in my opinion, given the lack of any prior criminal record,
the youth of mr. benjamin, his traumatic past and the exceptional progress he
has made while on a strict house arrest release, a conditional sentence of 2
years less a day , with house arrest for the entire sentence, achieves a
proportionate sentence in this case giving full effect to principles of
denunciation, and general  and specific deterrence, while providing for mr.
benjamin’s continued rehabilitation which, in my opinion, will serve to protect
the public from further offences.  in my opinion, on the particular facts of
this case, this conditional sentence, served in the community, would not
endanger the community and is consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing.
i will impose substantial obligations to perform community
service, both during the conditional sentence, and in a probation period of
three years.  community service will serve to reinforce that this offence was
an offence which endangered the community, and community service will provide
reparation for the harm done to the community, pursuant to
section 718
of the
criminal
code
.  it will also assist in mr. benjamin’s rehabilitation by engaging him
in prosocial community service, working with other prosocial members of the
community, who may be good role models for mr. benjamin of persons devoted to the
good of the community in their daily work.
accordingly, my sentence in this case is a conditional
sentence of imprisonment of 2 years less a day, served in the community on the
following terms:
1. for the entire sentence
of two years less a day, mr. benjamin will be subject to house arrest every day
with absence from his house permitted on the following terms:
(i) to go to and from, and
while attending at, employment pursuant to a schedule to be provided in advance
to his conditional sentence supervisor;
(ii) to go to and from, and
while attending at, any further academic or vocational education or training,
with details of such educational or training program to be provided in advance
to the conditional sentence supervisor;
(iii) to perform community
service as directed by the conditional sentence supervisor
(iv) to attend counselling
or rehabilitation sessions with krystal clear harvey at cafcan social services,
or such additional or other counselling as may be directed by your conditional
sentence supervisor, including counselling for substance abuse;
(v) to attend to the
necessaries of life for a period of four hours per week on a date and time to
be agreed upon with the conditional sentence supervisor;
(vi) to attend emergency
medical or dental care for himself or his immediate family, and to attend
routine medical or dental appointments, scheduled in advance, and provided to the
conditional sentence supervisor;
(vii) for any other
specific reason approved in advance in writing by the conditional sentence
supervisor.
2.  mr. benjamin shall
perform 150 hours of community service within the first 18 months of the
conditional sentence at a rate and schedule to be set by the conditional
sentence supervisor.
3.  he shall possess no
weapons as defined by the
criminal code
.
4.  mr. benjamin must sign
releases to permit his conditional sentence supervisor to monitor compliance
with the conditions of his sentence.
at the conclusion of the conditional sentence, mr. benjamin
will be placed on probation for three years with the following terms:
(i)
report to your probation
officer within 3 business days of the beginning of your probation and
thereafter as directed;
(ii) take such counselling
or rehabilitation programs as may be directed by your probation officer;
(iii)  make reasonable
efforts to seek and maintain employment and / or further education and provide
proof thereof to your probation officer;
(iv)  sign releases to
permit your probation officer to monitor your compliance with the terms of your
probation;
(v)   perform 100 hours of
community service within the first 18 months of your period of probation at a
rate established by your probation officer.
(vi)  possess no weapons as
defined by the
criminal code
.
i also order that mr. benjamin provide a dna sample as this
offence is a secondary designated offence.  there will also be a s.109 weapons
prohibition for 10 years, and a forfeiture order.
date: march 7, 2025                                             _______________________________
justice
david porter