ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.h.
, 2025 oncj 78
date:
2025 02 14
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 23 47101722
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
j.h.
reasons
for sentence
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on february 5, 2025
reasons
released on february 14, 2025
morgan ross....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
geoffrey read.................................................................................. counsel
for the offender
garg j.:
i found the offender guilty after trial of
sexually abusing his young daughter. she was eight years old at the time. the
offender abdicated his duty to protect his daughter and instead became the
person from whom she needed protection.
this case requires me to impose a sentence that
fully reflects the profound wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences
against children. at the same time, my sentence must reflect the systemic
factors related to the history of indigenous people in canada that played a
role in bringing this indigenous offender before the court.
these reasons explain how i arrived at imposing a
global six-year jail sentence.
circumstances of the offences
i concluded that the offender sexually abused
the victim on two occasions.
the only reasonable conclusion is that the offender engaged in the forced
penetration of the victim. i found him guilty of two counts of sexual
interference and two counts of sexual assault. one count of sexual assault and
one count of sexual inference were stayed pursuant to the
kienapple
principle.
the facts of each offence are as follows.
first, the offender entered
the victim’s bedroom while she was sleeping and put his mouth on her vagina.
she opened her eyes and saw what he was doing. the offender was bending down
with his knees on the bed. his hands might have been on the outside of the victim’s
thighs.
second, the offender entered the victim’s bed
and used a body part to touch her in or around her bum. the touching caused her
pain and pressure in the area. the offender kept holding the victim “in the
downward dog pose” and returning her to that position when she tried to lay
back down.
circumstances of the offender
the offender was born and raised in hamilton. he
is currently 39 years old. he has seven children in total. he resides with his
mother and his stepfather, whom the offender referred to in court as his
father. the stepfather is the brother of the offender’s biological father. the
offender has a fiancée, and they plan to marry after this court case. the
offender was expelled from school in grade 10 and did not return. he is not
currently working. he has worked in roofing and renovations on-and-off since he
was 18 years old, although the gladue report indicates that he previously worked
full-time.
the offender drinks alcohol and is currently
diagnosed with severe depression and anxiety. he has been suicidal because he
“feels like [his] life is over”. he uses cannabis frequently to cope with his
mental and physical ailments.
the offender has previously been on probation. he
failed to report on some occasions but reported as directed for the most part.
he took some sexual offending programming while on probation.
i will canvass the offender’s circumstances in
more depth later in these reasons.
positions of the
parties
the crown seeks an eight-year custodial sentence
and assorted ancillary orders. the defence initially sought a two-year sentence
with probation or a three-year term. at subsequent sentencing proceedings, the
defence asked for a conditional sentence with house arrest.
legal principles
the goal of any sentence under the
criminal
code
is to protect society, contribute to respect for the law, and help
maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society. the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the offender’s degree of responsibility. the sentence that i impose
must be tailored to the offender’s personal circumstances and the circumstances
of the offences that he committed.
sexual offence
against a child
sentencing for sexual violence against children must
reflect society’s contemporary understanding of the nature and gravity of the
offence. sexual violence violates the victim’s personal autonomy, bodily
integrity, sexual integrity, and dignity. the resulting impacts are
wide-ranging and include emotional, psychological, and physical harm to the
victim. children who suffer sexual abuse are more likely to struggle with
substance abuse, mental illness, post-traumatic stress disorder, eating
disorders, suicidal ideation, anxiety, depression, and poor self-esteem. these
impacts ripple outwards, spreading damage to the victim’s family and community:
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
at paras.
56-64
.
the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual
violence inform the gravity of the offence and the offender’s degree of
responsibility:
friesen
at para.
75
. the sentence imposed must recognize
(1) the inherent wrongfulness of the offence; (2) the potential harm to
children; and (3) the actual harm suffered: para. 76. sexual offences are inherently
violent. it is inherently exploitative for an adult to exert sexual force on a
child: paras. 77-78. the intentional sexual exploitation of a child is highly
morally blameworthy because children are extremely vulnerable: para. 90.
many of these principles are recognized in the
criminal
code
.
section 718.01
directs the court to give primary consideration to denunciation
and deterrence when sentencing for an offence that involved the abuse of a
person under eighteen years old.
section 718.2
(a)(iii.1) deems it aggravating
that an offence had significant impact on the victim considering their age and
personal circumstances.
indigenous offender
the offender in this case is indigenous. the
materials filed provide insight into the unique systemic and background factors
that played a part in the offender committing the offences. even in a grave
case of sexual violence against a child, i must consider how these factors might
mitigate the offender’s moral blameworthiness:
friesen
at para.
92
;
r.
v. r.s.
,
2023 onca 608
at para.
40
; see also
r. v. gladue
,
1999 canlii 679 (scc)
, 1
s.c.r. 688. taking the offender’s background into account allows me to impose a
sentence that is proportionate to his degree of responsibility:
r. v.
ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
at para.
73
. his degree of responsibility is
diminished to the extent that dislocation, marginalization, and racism could
reasonably have contributed to his offending. an offender’s reduced moral
responsibility must be reflected in the sentence imposed:
r.s.
at para.
54
per
paciocco j.a. (in dissent but not on this point).
the application of
gladue
does not
depend on a causal connection between the offender’s indigenous background and
the offence. the only requirement is that the negative consequences of
colonialism indirectly bear on the offender’s moral culpability.
i must also consider the offender’s indigenous
heritage and experiences as an indigenous person when assessing what sentencing
procedures and sanctions might be appropriate, including opportunities for
restorative sentencing:
gladue
at paras.
66-69
;
ipeelee
at para.
61
. the consideration of alternative sentencing approaches plays a part in the
process of reconciliation:
… reconciliation is a long
‑
term project. it will not be accomplished in a single sacred moment,
but rather through a continuous transformation of relationships and a braiding
together of distinct legal traditions and sources of power that exist:
reference
re an act respecting first nations, inuit and métis children, youth and
families
,
2024 scc 5
at para.
90
.
there is no rule that a court sentencing an
indigenous offender must give the most weight to the principle of restorative
justice, as compared to other legitimate principles of sentencing. the relative
weight to be assigned to restorative justice as against denunciation or
deterrence will be connected to the severity of the offence.
the principles of denunciation and deterrence may
predominate where the offence is sufficiently serious
:
r. v.
macintyre-syrette
,
2018 onca 706
at para.
18
;
r. v. wells
,
2000 scc
10
at para.
39
;
r. v. kakekagamick
,
2006 canlii 28549
(ont. c.a.) at
para.
42
.
it cannot be overlooked that the victim in this
case is also indigenous. the court in
friesen
explained that the
sentencing court may consider the sexual victimization of indigenous children when
imposing sentence: para. 70. section 718.04 holds that a court must give
primary consideration to denunciation and deterrence when sentencing for an
offence that involved the abuse
of a person who is vulnerable because of personal circumstances, including
because the person is indigenous and female. “there is no denying that
indigenous people…have endured serious injustices, including high rates of
sexual violence against women”:
r. v. barton
,
2019 scc 33
at para.
198
;
see also
r. v. trudeau
,
2024 oncj 119
at paras.
17-20
.
aggravating factors
aggravating factors increase the gravity of the
offence or increase the offender’s degree of responsibility:
r. v. m.v.
,
2023 onca 724
at para.
46
sentencing considerations that apply to all offences
of a particular type are not “aggravating”: para. 49.
there are many aggravating factors in this case.
harm to the victim and her family
it is statutorily aggravating that the offence significantly
impacted the victim. i must consider the actual harm that the victim
experienced from the offence. “this consequential harm is a key determinant of
the gravity of the offence”:
friesen
at para.
85
.
the victim articulated the harm in her impact
statement. she talked about how the offender took away her “innocence,
childhood, voice, and bravery”. she described her challenges at school: “i just
did the bare minimum and handed it in”. she explained how she started
experiencing depression and anxiety. “i have been on and off medication for
years. trying to figure out what fixes me, what helps me function without
having a severe panic attack, anxiety”. she tried to take her own life. her
sister described the impacts she witnessed: “anyone who knows [the victim], can
see how much this has hurt and affected her. my sister didn’t deserve this”.
the victim’s mother expressed her view that the offender’s actions “broke [the
victim’s] gentle spirit and stole her innocence”.
sexual violence also damages a victim’s
relationship with their family and community:
friesen
at para.
60
. the
victim’s mother and sister both described how the victim is resistant to
receiving affection and physical touch from others. the mother explained how
the family lost many long-standing relationships. she also blamed herself for
not being aware of the offences at an earlier stage and not doing more to ask
about what had happened.
breach of trust
and the victim’s young age
it is statutorily aggravating that the offender
abused a member of his family: s. 718.2(a)(ii). it is further aggravating
that the victim was only eight years old at the time of the offence:
s. 718.2(a)(ii.1). the offence constitutes a significant breach of her
trust: s. 718.2(iii). placing the breach on a spectrum highlights its
gravity:
friesen
at para.
126
.
it is hard to conceive of a more invasive breach
of trust than a father committing sexual offences against his own daughter while
she sleeps inside her bedroom in the family home: see
friesen
at para.
128
. the victim’s young age and vulnerable status increases the offender’s degree
of responsibility and his moral blameworthiness:
friesen
at paras.
90, 129
;
see also s. 718.04. as akhtar j. held in
r. v. n.k.
,
2024 onsc 2761
at
para.
47
: “sexual violence in the home is particularly harmful and abusing a
child whilst they are sleeping attracts the need to impose a higher sentence
because such victims are helpless”.
the offender also exploited his position of
trust to discourage the victim from disclosing the abuse: see
friesen
at
para.
127
. after one incident, the offender told the victim, “shh. don’t tell
mommy”. the trial evidence and the victim’s impact statement gave insight into
how she struggled to disclose the abuse: “there were times in my life where i
had tried my hardest to talk about what had happened to me and i found that i
physically couldn’t talk”.
multiple offences
given that i am imposing concurrent sentences,
the sentence must reflect how the offender sexually assaulted the victim on two
occasions. the multiple assaults increase the offender’s degree of
responsibility and heightened the psychological harm to the victim:
friesen
at paras.
131-133
. “each further instance [of sexual assault] shows a continued
and renewed choice by the offender to continue to violently victimize
children”: para. 133.
degree of
physical interference
courts have cautioned against downplaying sexual
offences that involve less physical interference. in such cases, the harm and moral
blameworthiness remain elevated. nevertheless, the jurisprudence establishes that
a sentencing court must consider the degree of physical interference. for
example, the court of appeal has held that a higher sentencing range applies
for cases of forced penetration:
r. v. a.j.k.
,
2022 onca 487
at para.
77
;
r. v. r.s.
,
2023 onca 608
at para.
22
; see also
friesen
at
para.
138
.
the heightened degree of physical interference
in this case aggravates the gravity of the offence and the offender’s moral
blameworthiness:
friesen
at para.
145
. i find that the first assault
involved the offender engaging in cunnilingus. and i find that the second
assault involved the offender attempting to or succeeding in anally penetrating
the victim. the victim’s description of the acts justifies these labels.
more than the label, what
counts here is that the offender’s actions were highly physically intrusive and
constituted a marked violation of the victim’s bodily integrity: see para.
146.
criminal record
the offender has a criminal record. he was convicted
of a drug offence in 2004 and credited for five days of pre-sentence custody. he
was convicted of assault in 2012 and received a suspended sentence. the
offender was also conditionally discharged for the offence of corrupting a
child with respect to the same victim.
the offence post-dates the present offences; i will not consider it on
sentencing.
the criminal record is relatively minor and does
not disclose prior convictions for sexual violence. however, the record offsets
the mitigation that would be afforded a first offender. it also shows me that the
offender previously committed violent acts within the home.
this aspect of the record
aggravates the offender’s moral culpability and enhances the need for specific
deterrence.
risk of re-offence
it is difficult to assess the risk of re-offence
in this case. there is no evidence going directly to this issue. i can draw an
inference that the offender poses some risk given that he is not a first
offender and committed the sexual offences on two occasions. i also note that
the offender has not shown remorse or taken accountability for the present
offences. this factor is not aggravating. rather, it shows the absence of a
mitigating factor and can limit the potential for rehabilitation: see
n.k.
at para.
49
. overall, i am prepared to find that the offender poses some risk
of re-offence.
mitigating
factors
there are “unique systemic and background
factors that are mitigating in nature” because they contributed to the
offender’s conduct:
wells
at para.
38
.
identifying
unique background factors
the offender identifies as mohawk and oneida
with paternal ancestry from both six nations of the grand river and the oneida
nation in wisconsin. his father died when he was two years old due to cirrhosis
of the liver from alcohol poisoning. the offender did not have a close
relationship with his stepfather growing up. the offender’s mother is
non-indigenous.
the offender does not hold “indian status” and has
lost connection with his indigenous heritage. when his grandmother married, she
was enfranchised and lost her status. enfranchisement was a method used to
assimilate indigenous people. it operated as an oppressive policy.
enfranchisement occurred to women and children regardless of whether they
wished to retain indian status. upon losing her status, the offender’s
grandmother “lost her connection” to her community and culture.
due to his distant relationship with his family
and his grandmother’s enfranchisement, the offender never learned much about
his indigenous culture or family history. the only involvement he has with his
culture is going to pow-wows or visiting cousins on the reserve. this lack of
cultural identity can contribute to the offender feeling adrift with no real
attachment to a group or place. nevertheless, the offender has connected with
some indigenous resources in the community. while on probation, he attended the
hamilton regional indian centre and completed the kizhaay anishinaabe niin – i
am a kind man. he believed this session improved his mental health.
the offender did not describe any abuse from his
parents. he said that he had “a pretty decent childhood”. the offender’s mother
did her best to provide the offender and his sister with whatever they needed. the
offender developed a positive relationship and a true bond with one uncle in
particular. however, as the offender grew older, he began to witness alcohol
and drug addiction in his family. the gladue report explains how colonialism
led indigenous people to question the application and effectiveness of
indigenous ways of healing and knowledge, which in turn contributed to the rise
of substance abuse.
the offender described sexual abuse that he experienced
when he was seven years old and then again when he was 11.
the initial abuse was perpetrated
by someone two years older than the offender. the latter abuse was perpetrated
by a co-worker of his mother’s. the offender has not received counselling for
these events or processed what happened to him. the gladue report explains how
indigenous cultural beliefs might contribute to the underreporting of childhood
sexual abuse.
during the preparation of the gladue report, the
offender expressed his desire to attend culturally relevant therapy that helps
him process his trauma and find more positive coping strategies.
applying the
background factors
the application of
gladue
does not lead
to a race-based discount. but the unique systemic and background factors carry
weight in determining the proportionate sentence. the offender experienced some
significant harms in childhood and adolescence. the disconnection to his
identity deprived him of another pathway to live a healthier life and process
his trauma. the desire to attend indigenous-based programming improves the
prospect of rehabilitation, although it seems the offender did not take full advantage
of previous opportunities to connect with his community.
overall, i find that the background factors
reduce the offender’s moral blameworthiness.
collateral
consequences
while not emphasized by the defence, i am
mindful that a lengthy term of imprisonment will separate the offender from his
fiancée and their two children. no specific information was provided about how
the family would suffer in the offender’s absence. nevertheless, the fiancée
indicated that the offender was a “great father”. she expressed the following
view: “i trust [the offender] fully and know that he would never do that to any
child”.
the collateral consequence emphasized by the
defence is that the offender’s stepfather has limited years left to live and
requires the offender’s help for personal care. for example, i am advised that
the offender helps his stepfather in and out of the bathtub and is the only one
available to pick him up when he falls. there are other people who assist the
stepfather, but the offender’s absence would create a gap in his care.
i accept that prison sentences often harm an
offender’s family. courts cannot let these consequences overwhelm the other
principles of sentencing:
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
at para.
43
. but
judges must preserve the family as much as possible, which includes considering
whether jail is necessary and how long the term should be: para. 44.
i will consider the stepfather’s health and the
offender’s caregiving when determining the length of the appropriate custodial sentence.
but relying on this collateral consequence to impose a conditional sentence with
house arrest would lead to an unfit sentence.
challenging conditions in pre-sentence custody
i can give the offender
duncan
credit for
challenging conditions in pre-sentence custody. this credit “addresses
exceptionally punitive conditions which go well beyond the normal restrictions
associated with pretrial custody”:
r. v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344
at
para.
50
. it “is not a deduction from the otherwise appropriate sentence, but
is one of the factors to be taken into account in determining the appropriate
sentence”: para. 52.
i decline to afford mitigation for the harsh
conditions in pre-trial custody. while i can take judicial notice of those
conditions to some extent, i was not provided case-specific evidence on the
challenges endured by the offender. i also note that the offender was only in
pre-sentence custody because he failed to re-attend court for his sentence: see
r. v. lanktree
,
2024 onca 506
at para.
14
. finally, the offender has
only been in pre-sentence custody for eight real days. any mitigating potential
would be minor when compared to the other factors in this case.
quantum analysis
mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual
offences against children are normal. upper-single digit and double-digit
penitentiary terms are not reserved for exceptional cases:
friesen
at
para.
114
.
the case of
r. v. r.s.
,
2023 onca 608
involved the sentencing of an indigenous offender after trial for the offences
of sexual assault and choking with respect to a single incident. the victim in
that case was not a child. the offender attacked the victim, forcibly undid her
clothing and underwear, removed her tampon, and penetrated her digitally. the
court held that deterrence and denunciation would normally require a sentence that
ranged from three to five years: para. 4. after
considering the
gladue
principles, the court acknowledged that the
offender’s background reduced his moral culpability. the court concluded that a
three-year sentence was fit. this decision is helpful in that it showed how the
court of appeal addressed the sentencing of an indigenous offender, albeit in the
context of an adult victim.
the parties provided cases in support of their
respective positions. i will outline some of the cases provided by the crown:
•
r. v. j.f.
,
2021
onsc 7613
– nine years imposed. the offender sexually abused his 11- to
15-year-old daughter. the sexual assaults progressed from fondling the breast
area to the vaginal area to full intercourse on multiple occasions. key
distinguishing factors include the absence of
gladue
factors and
that the assaults occurred with some frequency over more than four years.
•
r. v. a.s.
,
2023
onsc 983
– seven years imposed. the offender sexually abused his six- to
12-year-old neighbour. there were five incidents. no
gladue
factors,
but the offences were less physically invasive, and the breach of trust was
less severe.
•
r. v. n.k.
,
2024
onsc 2761
– seven years imposed. the offender sexually abused his eight- to
14-year-old stepdaughter. the offences were highly intrusive. no
gladue
factors, and the offences occurred with much greater frequency over a long
period of time. the offender also made the complainant watch pornography.
i will outline some of the cases provided by the
defence:
•
r. v. r.a.
,
2022
onsc 1161
– two years imposed. the offender sexually abused his 11-year-old
stepdaughter on two occasions. the offences were less invasive in that the
offender kissed the victim and touched the inside of her vagina. the sentencing
judge inferred harm to the victim. unlike this case, the judge did not have the
benefit of detailed actual harm to the victim and her family. i note that the
crown only asked for a 2-year sentence.
•
r. v. roper
,
2020
onsc 7411
– five and a half years imposed. the offender sexually abused the nine-year-old
victim. she considered the offender a father figure. the offender did not have
a criminal record. the offender touched the victim’s vagina, touched her
breasts, and placed his penis on her vagina. the offender had a limited role as
a caregiver: para. 28.
•
r. v. t.j.
,
2021
onca 391
– two years imposed. the offender sexually abused the six- or seven-year-old
victim on one occasion. the offender took the victim’s hands and placed them on
his penis. he used her hands to rub his penis, which became aroused. while the
offender’s conduct was highly morally blameworthy, the conduct in the present
case was more severe.
•
r. v. h.k.
,
o.j. no. 6144 (sup. ct.)
– six years imposed. the offender sexually
abused his daughter when she was between the ages of eight and 10. he rubbed
his penis on her buttocks on multiple occasions, touched her vagina, and kissed
her on one occasion. the offender had no prior convictions.
•
r. v. gutierrez
,
2023 onsc 2990
– one and a half years imposed. the offender sexually abused his
stepson and stepnephew during the 1990’s. i find it relevant that the judge
imposed a carceral sentence after rejecting the joint submission for a
conditional sentence. prior to sentencing, the offender confessed to his crimes
and expressed remorse.
sentencing is an inexact science. it is not my
task to determine which prior case matches this case and impose that sentence.
at the same time, the parity principle insists that similar sentences be
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances:
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
2
.
i have considered the recommended community
treatment programs outlined at the end of the gladue report. however, i
conclude that a non-custodial disposition, a conditional sentence, or a
reformatory sentence with probation would be manifestly unfit.  i prioritize
denunciation and deterrence over restorative justice because the offence is extremely
serious: see
macintyre-syrette
at para.
18
. a penitentiary sentence is
required.
some of the cases provided by the crown involve
frequent conduct over a longer timeframe. none of the cases involve the clear
application of
gladue
principles.
the
a.s.
decision is more on point when it comes to the number of
assaults. and while the offender in that case occupied a position of trust, the
breach of trust in this case was more severe. the offender in
a.s.
also
did not have a criminal record.
the complete sentencing analysis leads me to impose
a custodial term of six years. i find that a six-year term is the least
intrusive and the lowest quantum that will achieve the overall purpose of being
a proportionate sanction. this sentence accounts for the offender’s reduced
moral blameworthiness and prospects of rehabilitation while prioritizing
denunciation and deterrence. the offender has a criminal record. he discouraged
the victim from telling her mother about the abuse. the offence involved the
sexual exploitation of an indigenous child. the breach of trust was
extraordinary. the victim was highly vulnerable by every metric. the impact was
devastating and wide-reaching.
disposition
i impose a global six-year prison sentence.
i credit the offender for eight real days of
pre-sentence custody enhanced to 12 days. the remaining sentence is five years
and 353 days in the penitentiary. the sentence is concurrent on both counts.
i am obliged to make a soira order: s.
490.012(1). the offender was convicted of designated offences (sexual assault
and sexual interference), imprisoned for more than two years, and the victim
was under 18. i fix the duration at 20 years.
pursuant to s. 743.21(1), the offender is
prohibited from communicating directly or indirectly with the victim during the
custodial period of his sentence.
i make an order under s. 161 for a period of eight
years. the overarching function of this order is to protect children from
sexual violence. the order “constitutes punishment and is not available as a
matter of course: there must be an evidentiary basis upon which to conclude
that the particular offender poses a risk to children; the specific terms of
the order must constitute a reasonable attempt to minimize the risk; and the
content of the order must respond carefully to an offender’s specific
circumstances”:
r. v. schulz
,
2018 onca 598
at para.
41
. even if the
offender poses a low risk of re-offence, it is appropriate to minimize the risk
that he might pose to children for whom he stands in a position of trust:
r.
v. h.p.
,
2023 onsc 4808
at para.
78
; see also
r. v. s.s.
,
2024 onsc
3568
at paras.
62-68
.
the offender is prohibited from:
(a)
being within one kilometre of any dwelling-house
or school where the victim ordinarily resides or goes to school;
(b)
seeking, obtaining, or continuing any
employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated, or becoming or being
a volunteer in a capacity, that involves being in a position of trust or
authority towards persons under the age of 16 years; and
(c)
having in-person contact or communication with a
person who is under the age of 16 years, with the following three exceptions:
(i) the offender can contact and communicate with his two children l.h.
and o.h. if the offender receives permission from their mother, this permission
can be revoked at any time; (ii) the offender can contact and communicate with children
of any age if another adult is in the immediate physical presence; and (iii) the
offender can contact and communicate with children of any age if he receives
permission from the child’s legal guardian and that guardian is aware of the
offender’s convictions, this permission can be revoked at any time.
i order the offender to provide a dna sample for
these mandatory primary designated offences.
i waive the victim surcharge.
released:  february 14, 2025
signed:
justice davin m.k. garg
the full facts are contained in the reasons for judgment at
r. v. j.h.
,
2024 oncj 494
.
these offences were described as the second and fourth incidents in the reasons
for judgment.
see also s. 718.2(a)(ii.1).
“forced” simply refers to the absence of consent. it does not
require added violence beyond the inherent violence of a sexual assault:
r.
v. s.w.
,
2024 onca 173
at para.
39
.
i did not use these labels in my reasons for judgment because it
was unnecessary to label the acts to determine whether the offender had
committed the offences charged. but for sentencing, i find the labels helpful
in comparing this case to others. my underlying factual findings are unchanged.
see
r. v. j.h.
,
2024 oncj 311
at paras.
6-10
.
gladue report at p. 23.
i will not detail this abuse. the offender requested that the court handle his
disclosure with discretion.
the crown also provided
r. v. s.s.
,
2024 onsc 3568
. the offender
received a seven-year sentence. no gladue
report could be provided. the
sentencing judge gave some limited weight to the offender’s indigenous
background: para. 60.