ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. cheema
, 2025 oncj 736
date: december
21, 2025
court
file no.:  brampton 3111 998 23 31113362
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
gurman cheema
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 12 december 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 21 december 2025
r. mullins................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
s. diclemente................................................ counsel
for the offender gurman cheema
reasons for sentence
renwick j.:
introduction
following a six-day trial, i found the offender
guilty of driving dangerously causing the death of rosa narvaez, contrary to
s.
320.13(3)
of the
criminal code
.
the offender’s driving caused a tragedy that
never needed to happen. ms. narvaez was driving the speed limit on a sunday
morning when the offender’s excessive speed and balding tires caused him to
lose control on a damp city street, resulting in his lexus crossing a raised
median and violently slamming into ms. narvaez’ oncoming vehicle. as was
evident on some of the dash-cam videos presented at trial, the violent collision
narrowly missed impacting other vehicles before the lexus also struck vanessa
allen-green’s car.
it is trite to note that any sentence the court
imposes will not adequately represent the undeserved loss of a wonderful
mother, wife, and grand-mother and the incalculable suffering caused to many.
for the other drivers, witnesses, family members, and first responders of this
collision, the sentence will do little to ease their pain, loss, or trauma. at
best, the sentence represents an attempt, in a considered and rational way, to
respond to a senseless crime and to hold the offender accountable.
general principles
section 320.12
of the
criminal code
recognizes and declares the following:
(a)
operating a conveyance is a privilege that is
subject to certain limits in the interests of public safety that include
licensing, the observance of rules and sobriety;
(b)
the protection of society is well served by
deterring persons from operating conveyances dangerously…, because that conduct
poses a threat to the life, health and safety of canadians…
through many of its decisions, the
supreme court has explained the principles that apply to the sentencing of
offenders.
in
r. v. lacasse
, the court held that:
the determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation. it
involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision.
the purposes of sentencing as expressed
in
section 718
of the
criminal code
are to contribute to respect for the
law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing
appropriate sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:
denunciation; deterring the offender and other persons from committing offences;
separating offenders from society, where necessary; assisting in rehabilitating
offenders; providing reparation for harm done to victims or to the community;
and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders while acknowledging the
harm they have caused. there is no single fit sentence for any particular
offence. the relevance and relative importance of each of the sentencing objectives
will vary according to the nature of the crime and the circumstances of the
offender.
in
hamilton and mason
, doherty j.a. of the ontario court
of appeal stated that:
the
"gravity of the offence" refers to the seriousness of the offence in
a generic sense as reflected by the potential penalty imposed by parliament and
any specific features of the commission of the crime which may tend to increase
or decrease the harm or risk of harm to the community occasioned by the
offence…
the
"degree of responsibility of the offender" refers to the offender's
culpability as reflected in the essential substantive elements of the offence -
especially the fault component - and any specific aspects of the offender's
conduct or background that tend to increase or decrease the offender's personal
responsibility for the crime
.
section 718.1 of the
code
ensures that proportionality is
the fundamental principle of sentencing. the punishment should fit the crime. however,
proportionality is not the sole principle to be considered. a sentence should
be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.
sentencing considerations
the maximum sentence for this offence is life
imprisonment. the minimum sentence for a first offence (applicable here) is a
fine of $1000.
victim impact
by his deliberately risky driving, the offender
caused the death of rosa narvaez and bodily harm to zelma allen-green. these
people and their families did nothing to deserve the loss, pain, and on-going suffering
caused by this offender.
in her victim impact statement, ms. allen-green
wrote that “the accident and all that came with it has definitely aroused all
sorts of emotions that cannot be explained…”
ms. narvaez’ loving husband, pedro narvaez, wrote
that he “lost the best thing in my life, a person who was always there for me
and who was my best friend…”
the victim impact statement of ms. narvaez’ daughter, christina, noted
that she is so wracked with grief that she feels continually anxious. a poem
she wrote to celebrate her mother ends:
the special
years will not return,
when we were all
together,
but with the love
within our hearts,
you will walk with
us forever.
her son roberto wrote:
i do not
believe that a sentence would change another person’s views or mentality, but i
pray that people think and realise you can change a whole family’s life with
your decisions or actions…i just hope we can put an end to these senseless
tragedies, so other families do not have to go through the pain and suffering
our family is forced to live with.
pedro narvaez junior also wrote about his
mother:
…you loved
being a mother and provider for your children. but what made me most happy was
how you help raise my kids (your grandkids)…my mother was superwoman, she was
the best mother, grandmother and wife.
ms. narvaez’ daughter-in-law also noted her fears
about being in a car or losing her husband in the same way. two of ms. narvaez’
grandchildren drew pictures of their “nana,” which are both beautiful and
incredibly sad. these are snapshots of a loving wife, mother, and grand-mother
who was taken from her family too soon.
no sentence can ever replace ms. narvaez, or
heal the deep loss of her grieving family. likewise for ms. allen-green’s pain.
nor should the sentence focus on these aims.
positions of the parties
the prosecution seeks a penitentiary sentence of
four to five years, a driving prohibition of 10 years, and an order requiring
submission for deoxyribonucleic acid sampling for the national offender
databank (“dna order”).
the offender seeks the maximum reformatory
prison sentence, two years less one day, served conditionally, in the community,
and a driving prohibition of four to seven years. the offender opposes a dna
order.
the parties produced trial jurisprudence to
support a range of sentences from conditional sentences of imprisonment to
penitentiary sentences of five years. i have read and considered all of the
cases presented. none was binding upon me. several spoke of deliberate
risk-taking that is similar to this offender’s conduct.
the decisions produced demonstrate the wide
range of sentences for this offence, depending on the moral blameworthiness of
the offender in all the circumstances. the cases make it clear that the circumstances
of each case and each offender are unique. accordingly, i must reflect on the
specific aggravating and mitigating circumstances of this case to determine a
just sentence.
aggravating
circumstances
section 320.22(a) dictates that it is
aggravating that the offender’s driving resulted in the death and bodily harm
of more than one person. in addition to the tragic loss of life of ms. narvaez,
the offender’s driving was agreed by the parties as the cause of bodily harm (on-going
neck and shoulder pain) suffered by ms. allen-green.
the offender’s dangerous driving occurred on a
city street with many vehicles present. the collision hit two vehicles and
narrowly missed several others.
the offender’s car was partially airborne when it collided with oncoming
traffic. the driving at issue put several other motorists in the area at risk.
the offender’s driving included speeding well in
excess of the posted speed limit on a damp street with balding tires, over
several seconds, as he changed lanes and increased his speed to pass other
motorists. this conduct was deliberately risky.
there was evidence to support an unsafe mindset
on the offender’s part, just prior to the collision at a nearby red traffic
light, where it appeared that he was showing off (revving his engine) or even attempting
to engage another motorist in a race.
mitigating
circumstances
the offender is a young adult. he was 19 years
and 10 months old at the time of the offence and he recently turned 22 years
old. he had no prior driving or criminal record.
the offender is productive. he has graduated
from high school and he has registered for marketing and related business
courses at humber polytechnic.
additionally, the offender has completed an
indeterminate amount of mental health counselling and he has taken two on-line
defensive driving courses.
the offender is supported by a loving family. he
exhibits pro-social behaviours: he volunteers at his place of worship and he
has worked part-time as a courier driver.
the offender is remorseful. in his letter to the
court he noted that he carries the guilt of having taken a life and impacted
many others.
the pre-sentence report, which is positive,
supports these findings and noted:
during the
narration of the incident, the subject explained that he lost control of the
vehicle as he would never intentionally cause harm to anyone. it is noteworthy
that this is the subject’s first involvement with the criminal justice system.
his self-awareness, humility and willingness to be held accountable denotes an
earnest frame of mind as it relates to the seriousness of this offence.
i conclude that the offender is an excellent
candidate for rehabilitation and he presents a very low risk to re-offend.
discussion
i note that as a sentencing sanction, imprisonment is always to
be used as a last resort. it should be used sparingly, when it is required, and
the sentence must aim to denounce an offender’s conduct and deter them or other
like-minded offenders from similar offences, without crushing an offender’s
potential for rehabilitation.
in this case, it is recognized that the youth of the offender,
his prior exemplary character, and his past and prospects for pro-social behaviour
mitigate toward a sentence that ranks rehabilitation as the primary goal above denunciation
and deterrence.
this is consonant with recent guidance from our court of appeal:
sentencing judges must also
respect several other settled principles when sentencing youthful offenders for
their first criminal offence. first, they must practice restraint. this
requires them to avoid imprisoning young adults when possible. when
imprisonment is necessary, it also requires them to make the sentence as short
as possible to achieve the principles and objectives of sentencing. see
priest
,
at pp. 544-546. second, they must prioritize rehabilitation as the paramount
sentencing objective. where necessary, they must also prioritize specific
deterrence. see
brown,
at paras. 5 and 10. third, they cannot focus
exclusively on denunciation and general deterrence or elevate those objectives
above rehabilitation and specific deterrence. see
borde,
at para. 36;
brown,
at para. 7. fourth, they must consider young adults' reduced moral
culpability and the harsher impact that incarceration causes them due to their
stage of life. see
r.
v
. hills,
2023 scc 2
at paras.
161 and 165
;
r.
v
. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26
,
at paras.
132 and
152
.
sentencing judges must always
give serious and sufficient consideration to all these principles. merely
referring to them as relevant is not always sufficient to show their proper
application. failing to apply or unreasonably underemphasizing them is an error
in principle.
in my view, if this offence had been committed
by an older offender, it would warrant a four-year penitentiary sentence. this
is commensurate with the dangerousness of the driving, the seriousness of the
offence, and the harm caused.
counsel for the offender submits that several comparable cases
have resulted in conditional sentences of imprisonment. he argues that placing
excessive weight on the tragic outcome of the offender’s conduct, a death and
bodily harm caused to two motorists, risks producing a disproportionate sentence
for a brief period of poor judgment.
with respect, i disagree that this was a
singular bad decision of short duration. this offender was deliberate in his
speed, his lane changes, and his rapid acceleration over a sustained distance.
he ignored the warning signs of traction-loss and continued to push the vehicle
until he lost complete control. he chose to put several other motorist’s safety
at risk by his deliberate conduct. the seriousness of this offence (evidenced
by the consequences of the poor driving) raises the moral blameworthiness of
the offender.
in my view, a reformatory prison sentence would
be insufficient to respond to the dangerousness of the offender’s conduct. it
is not the consequences of the bad driving that should be punished, but the
driving itself. here, the driving was inexplicable and totally unnecessary. the
garmin video shows that the offender had already passed all other westbound
traffic, yet he persisted to accelerate to the point of catastrophic slippage. while youth, no prior record, remorse, and rehabilitation prospects
meaningfully reduce the term from what would be imposed for an older offender,
they do not justify a sentence below two years. as a result, a conditional
sentence is unavailable.
i agree that specific deterrence plays a reduced
role in sentencing this offender. he is not likely to drive so deliberately
aggressively ever again. i have also taken into account that any prison
sentence will be a hardship for this offender and his family and given his
prior unblemished character, the sentence must demonstrate penal restraint.
a life has been lost and another motorist’s life
has been significantly impacted. these consequences were not the result of a
mere accident, civil negligence, or quasi-criminal (provincial offences) behaviour.
rather, the offender’s moral responsibility is heightened because he drove in
an obviously dangerous way and deliberately undertook a course of action
(speeding, lane changes, and rapid acceleration) over a protracted period, in
moderate traffic, on wet roads, with balding tires. the offender knowingly
undertook maneuvers that placed the lives and safety of others at significant
risk and continued his conduct, regardless of wheel slippage, until the risks
materialized.
the sentence
accounting for the offender’s youth, i will
impose a sentence of three years of imprisonment. this prioritizes the
offender’s rehabilitation while tracking his actual culpability for this
offence.
ancillary orders
the offender is prohibited from driving a motor
vehicle for five years in addition to the period of his confinement. this
period is appropriate for the actual dangerousness exhibited by the offender’s
driving.
given the potential maximum sentence, this is a
secondary designated dna offence. having considered the minimal impact upon his
privacy interests, it is appropriate to make a dna sampling order in respect of
the offender.
the offender’s dna will be taken in hygienic conditions
that respect the bodily integrity, health, safety, and privacy of the offender,
while in custody. if the offender refuses to cooperate with the dna sampling
procedure, reasonable force may be used to take his dna sample.
conclusion
this case is an example of the intersection of deliberately risky
behaviour, tragedy, and consequence. a meaningful sentence in this case must
account for the rehabilitative potential of the youthful offender, the serious
nature of the offence, and the harm and suffering caused to two motorists and
their families.
it is for these reasons that gurman cheema is
sentenced to three years in a penitentiary for the offence of driving
dangerously causing death. a driving prohibition of five years and a dna order
are also made.
for his sake, and the sake of our community, i
wish that gurman cheema fully rehabilitates and lives up to his full potential.
released:  21 december 2025
justice
g. paul renwick
2015 scc 64 (canlii)
,
3 s.c.r. 1089
at para.
58
.
see
r.
v.
hamilton
and mason
,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3252 (c.a.) at
para.
102
hamilton
, supra
, at paras.
90-91
.
see s. 718.2(b) of the
criminal code
.
see s. 320.21(a) of the
criminal code
.
this is especially apparent in the garmin video, trial exhibit
#1c.
r.
v
. habib
,
2024 onca
830
at paras.
31 and 32
.