ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. pennock
, 2025 oncj 8
date:
2025 01 08
court
file no.:  brampton 21-16233
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
darren pennock
before
justice s. caponecchia
guilty
plea: may 17, 2024
sentencing
submissions:  november 29, 2024
reasons
for sentence: january 8, 2025
g. gill .................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
m. murphy................................................................................... counsel
for mr. d. pennock
caponecchia
j.:
introduction
mr. pennock plead guilty to one count of fraud, breach of
trust and six counts of uttering a forged document. briefly stated, the facts
are that over a 7-year period while he was employed as the
chief executive officer for the
john howard society of peel, he misappropriated $327,045.00.
position
of the parties
the crown seeks a sentence of two years less a day jail, followed
by three years’ probation.
the defence submits that a conditional sentence of imprisonment
to be served in the community is a fit and appropriate sentence.
circumstances
of the offence
mr. pennock was employed by the john howard society as their ceo
starting in november 2012. he oversaw an annual budget of three million
dollars. in august 2019 it was discovered that mr. pennock’s work credit card
had a very high balance. the organization commenced an investigation into the
defendant’s expense claims and discovered irregularities. mr. pennock’s
employment was terminated in september 2019. professionals were hired to
conduct a forensic analysis and the loss was discovered. mr. pennock was
charged on october 19, 2021.
the following is a summary of unauthorized expenses paid for using the
organizations funds that the defendant personally benefited from over the
7-year period of his employment:
a)
gift cards - $40,895.61
b)
legal fees - $35,438.44
c)
storage fees - $1466.10
d)
travel, meals,
entertainment - $159,375.89
e)
bell iphone -
$812.75
f)
rogers
invoice - $764.35
g)
tangible
expenses/assets - $63,859.87
h)
retirement gift
cards - $950.56
i)
vacation
pay claim - $23,076.89.
the investigation also revealed that mr. pennock forged the signature of
a member of the board of directors on six different occasions between december
7, 2015 and december 2, 2017.
background
of the offender
mr. pennock is currently 53 years old.
he was raised in mississauga. his mother was a teacher who did not
return to her work after she had two children, mr. pennock, and his sister. mr.
pennock describes his father as hardworking and his upbringing as fantastic.
his childhood included cottage time in the summer, time spent together as a
family and more than one trip to florida.
mr. pennock’s parents separated when he was either 10 or 12, after his
father’s business failed.  after his parents separated, he moved with his
mother and sister to a smaller home, and they lived a more modest life. his
mother returned to teaching when mr. pennock was in high school. he
subsequently came to learn that his father’s drinking was a problem in his
parents’ marriage, and he supported his father through some rehabilitative
programs. his father died unexpectedly in his 40s.
following
high school, mr. pennock completed a program over a 7-year and became a fully
certified pilot.  he worked in the field between 1999-2001.  in 2001 he started
a related business and sold it to his partner in 2007. he worked as an air
traffic controller between 2008-2012, following which he was hired by the john
howard society. he earned $125,000 a year as the ceo for the john howard
society.
mr.
pennock is currently unemployed. his future goals include obtaining his
certification in project management. since 2022 he has spent time volunteering
3-4 hour each saturday at a cat rescues center with his current wife.
in
1996, at the age of 26, mr. pennock married his first wife. he met her while
working at a yacht club. they had two sons, currently aged 22 and 24. mr.
pennock divorced after 18 years of marriage in 2014. he remarried a high school
friend in 2021, at the age of 51. he resides with his second wife in a home
they jointly own. his wife works.
mr.
pennock enjoys the love and support of his current wife, mother, both children
and sister, who all have positive things to say about him. his family members
and longtime friend were all shocked to learn of the offences before the court.
they all know him as a supportive father, son and partner.
mr.
pennock’s background includes two battles with cancer: the first before he
committed the offences, the second after he was terminated from his employment
with the john howard society. he was first diagnosed with follicular lymphoma
stage 1 in january 2010, while married to his first wife. he responded well to
treatment and was in remission when the couple divorced in 2014. in 2020 he was
diagnosed with stage 2 of the same disease. he was involved with his second
wife at the time his cancer returned. he is currently in remission and
continues to experience some residual effects from his last treatment,
including pain in his spine and problems with sleeping.
mr.
pennock described to the author of the pre-sentence report that when he
committed the offences between 2012 – 2019 he was in a “dark” place emotionally
due to his health issues. he attributed his crimes to stupidity, lack of
judgment and a sense that the “clock was ticking on his life span.”
mr.
pennock has no history of mental health issues or substance abuse. he engaged
in 8-10 sessions of counseling between 2013 and 2014, when he was going through
his separation with his first wife. on may 2, 2024 he sent an email seeking to
engage some counselling services through an employee assistance program.
1.
general principles of sentencing
sentencing
is a highly individualized process. a delicate balancing of the various
sentencing principles and objectives is called for, in line with the overriding
principle that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
section
718
of the
criminal code
states that the fundamental purpose of sentencing
is to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful, and safe society. this is to be achieved by imposing sentences that
have, among other objectives, the objectives of:
•
separating offenders from society,
where necessary;
•
denouncing unlawful conduct;
•
general deterrence;
•
rehabilitation; and
•
promoting of a sense of responsibility
in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the
community.
2.
aggravating and mitigating factors
section
718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
indicates that a sentence should be
increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender.
there
are two mitigating factors in this case:
1.
mr. pennock’s guilty plea.
i accept that his guilty plea reflects his remorse and regret.
he also wrote a letter of apology to the john howard society.
by pleading guilty he has also spared the witnesses the ordeal
of having to testify in court. he has also saved the taxpayers the time and
expense of a multi-day trial in one of the busiest jurisdictions in this
country.
2.
mr. pennock made restitution.
to do so, he took out a second mortgage on the house he jointly
owns with his current wife. his wife now shares the liability that he incurred.
the restitution was finalized on may 24, 2024, a week after his guilty plea, a year
after a civil default judgment was made against him and his wife on may 11,
2023. after the civil judgment was paid, the legal restrictions ordered against
the couple’s property were lifted on july 8, 2024.
turning
next to the aggravating factors:
1.
mr. pennock has a 1990 conviction for
possession of a credit card obtain by crime. he was 20 years old at the time.  he
received a suspended sentence. this aggravating factor is of little to no weight
given the passage of time.
2.
mr. pennock’s actions were not isolate
in nature. they took place over multiple years and involved repeated deceitful
conduct.
3.
the offender did
not voluntarily stop committing the offences. he ceased committing the offences
because his employment was terminated.
4.
mr. pennock’s actions were not
impulsive. his actions were calculated and required a concerted effort of
manipulation of his co-workers and paperwork to conceal his conduct from his
colleagues and the board of directors.
5.
mr. pennock stole from an employer. he
was the ceo, entrusted with the wellbeing of the organization. the offences
involve a serious breach of trust, a statutory aggravating factor:
s.
718.2
(a)(iii).
his employer, the john howard associate of
peel, is a non-profit charitable organization. the organization serves the most
vulnerable and under privileged members of the community. it does not have deep
pockets. mr. pennock knew the organization depends on donations, volunteers and
staff who were paid a modest income, unlike mr. pennock.
6.
mr. pennock stole money out of greed.
he used the funds to pay his personal expense,
including but not limited to his legal fees, a storage facility, cell phone and
dining out.  he used it to support his lifestyle not withstanding he was being
paid a good living wage, $125,000/yr.
7.
the total amount of money mr. pennock
defrauded from the john howard society was significant,
$327,045.00.  he forged multiple signatures to do so.
8.
finally, the impact on the victims.
section 718.2
(a)(iii.1) of
the
criminal code
explicitly provides that a court shall take into
consideration evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the
victim.
the victims in this case include the members of the community who
benefit from the services the john howards society provides.
every dollar mr. pennock stole over the years was money
that he took away from the most in need: the underhoused, persons suffering
from addiction, the mentally ill, and individuals who are food insecure.
the
victims include the co-workers he deceived and who he betrayed. the rippling
effects of mr. pennock’s offences were articulately set out by three
individuals who presented victim impact statements.
first, kara hart. she is the
current ceo of the john howard society. she described how programming suffered during
the time mr. pennock misappropriated funds. the organizations reputation also
suffered. miss hart continues to work to build back trust with members of the
community on whom the organization relies. funders no longer consider the
organization a safe place to donate funds.  mr. pennock’s crimes also had a
negative impact on staff.  the morale of their modestly paid staff members
suffered. mr. pennock’s actions planted seeds of distrust amongst the
leadership team. feelings of anger, betrayal and shame linger to this day.
second, the court heard from donna
murray. miss murray recently retired from the jhs after 38 years of service.
during her tenure she was responsible for overseeing the finances for the peel
chapter of the jhs. she feels mr. pennock took advantage of her trusting
nature. she described how the defendant lied and deceived her repeatedly when
she went to him to discuss financial irregularities. he made her feel stupid
and gullible. his actions impacted her self-confidence and caused her to
question her judgment. she had to live through the time-consuming ordeal of an
audit with an outside firm. she lived with the fear that suspicion might be
placed on her. she was afraid that her professional reputation could be
irreparably damaged. the impact of the workload, along with her anxiety ever since
mr. pennock left the organization five years ago has been enormous. the
enormity of mr. pennock’s crimes, while under her watch, played a part in her
decision to retire. she now questions her trust in mankind.
third, kathryn lynch.  she described
the impact of the offences on her as a taxpayer, donor to the jhs and a former
employee of the organization. kathryn lynch began working for the jhs in 1982,
when she administered the bail supervision program. when she retired in 2018,
mr. pennock was the ceo, and she was the peel branch manager. she feels shame
for having played a part in mr. pennock joining the organization in 2012. she
continues to blame herself for ignoring various red flags over the years. she explained
that she overlooked them and accepted mr. pennock’s explanations because of the
close trusting relationship she had with mr. pennock. she feels he took
advantage of her trust repeatedly. upon her retirement after 35 years of
service, she was given a gift certificate. when she went to use it, she
discovered it had no value. she later learned that mr. pennock used the gift
certificate for himself.
3.
gravity of the offence and degree of responsibility
section
718.1
of the
criminal code
states that any sentence imposed must be proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
the
offences are serious. mr. pennock’s crimes were repeated and calculated. mr.
pennock abused a position of trust to take money from a nonprofit charitable
organization. he took money designated to help the most disadvantaged members
of the community to support his lifestyle instead. notwithstanding that he
returned the stolen funds five years after he was terminated, his crimes had a
real impact on the organization’s ability to deliver services during the years he
misappropriated the funds. he damaged the organization’s reputation and eroded
the confidence of donors and other stakeholders on whose funding the
organization relies.  his actions had a lasting emotional impact on the people
he deceived to commit his crimes and on the overall morale of the staff.
mr.
pennock’s degree of responsibility is high.  he single handedly perpetrated the
offences with no assistance from anyone else. when he committed the offences, he
was a mature, educated individual earning a good income. he was involved in a
happy relationship with his second wife. he enjoyed the privilege of home
ownership and had close relationships with him family members. his cancer was
in remission. when faced with the anxiety of a future recurrence of cancer and the
possibility of an early mortality, he chose to take from others less fortunate
than himself to support his lifestyle choices.
4.
case law
section
718.2
(b) of the
criminal code
states that a sentence should be similar
to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances.
i
have reviewed the case law relied upon by each party to support their
positions. the cases relied upon by the defense in which conditional sentences
were imposed involved different offenders:
•
r. v. label
2018 oncj 748
: the offender stole from his
employer to support a gambling addiction. the loss to the company, after an
insurance claim, was $27,480.29.
•
r. v. curreri and l.l.
2017 onsc 5662
: the offenders
committed frauds involving properties owned by mr. curreri’s father. this case
did not involve a breach of trust (para 75, 98).
•
r. v. gibb and petros
,
2014 onsc 5316
: the offenders
defrauded their elderly friends of $100,000. the offence was described as a
fraudulent commercial transaction that did not involve a breach of trust (para
52).
•
r. v. umenwoke
,
2013 onsc 4496
: the offender impersonated
someone to exact a $75, 650 u.s. fraud on a financial institution (para 4).
this was not a typical breach of trust case (para 47).
the
cases relied upon by the crown do not include an important mitigating feature
present in this case, the return of stolen funds.
neither
counsel referred the court to any sentencing cases involving a theft or fraud
from a charitable organization by an employee. in the case of
r. v.
bracegirdle
2004 abca 252 (canlii)
,
a.j. no. 827
the alberta court of appeal overturned a conditional
sentence and substituted a sentence of two years less a day jail for an
offender who stole from the cystic fibrosis society during their employment.
the defendant was the general and financial manager of the society in edmonton,
who stole $175,463 from the organization over the course of over five years.
the society discovered that its precarious financial position had been caused
by the offenders’ thefts. the defendant plead guilty but had not made
restitution.
the
overarching principles in the case law submitted to the court include the following:
a)
both before and after parliament’s
introduction of conditional sentences, cases of large-scale fraud by persons in
a position of trust have typically resulted in substantial jail sentences
in the range of three to five years. even
where mitigating considerations have reduced the sentence
to the reformatory range, a jail term, not a sentence served in the community,
has usually been imposed;
b)
general
deterrence and denunciation are primary sentencing objectives when sentencing
offenders for abusing a position of trust and defrauding an employer. it is
only where there are exceptional mitigating circumstances that a significant
fraud with breach of trust would warrant a conditional sentence;
c)
c
onditional sentences are available even in cases where
deterrence and denunciation are the paramount sentencing objectives.
the
difference between imprisonment in jail and a conditional sentence of
imprisonment to be served in the community is often the presence or absence of
exceptional mitigating circumstances.
d)
the ontario court of appeal has recognized that individuals who
perpetrate frauds are usually seen in the community as solid, responsible and
law-abiding citizens. often, they suffer personal and financial ruin as a
result of the exposure of their frauds. those factors cannot, however, alone
justify any departure from a range. the offender's prior good character and
standing in the community are to some extent the tools by which they commit and
sustain frauds over lengthy time periods. considerable personal hardship, if
not ruin, is virtually inevitable upon exposure of one's involvement in these
kinds of frauds. it cannot be regarded as the kind of unusual circumstance
meriting departure from a range.
5.
the
principle of restraint and conditional
sentences
section
718.2(d) states that an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances.
section
718.2(e) states that all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, which are
reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or
to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular
attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
in
this case, the parties agree that a conditional sentence is an available
sentence given the crown is seeking a sentence of two years less a day jail. therefore,
i will first give careful consideration to whether one should be imposed.   in
determining whether a conditional period of imprisonment is appropriate, two
main questions must be answered.
the
first is whether the imposition of a conditional period of imprisonment to be
served in the community would endanger the safety of the community. danger to
the public is evaluated by reference to the risk of re-offence, and the gravity
of the danger in the event of a re-offence.
in this case mr. pennock committed multiple serious offences over a
prolonged period while holding a position of trust.
he is a 53-year-old, educated
and highly capable individual. he is currently unemployed but has a longstanding
history of steady employment before he was let go for committing the offences
before the court. he has a lot of family support in the community. overall, i
conclude that he does not currently constitute a danger to the public.
turning
to the second issue. is a conditional sentence
consistent
with the fundamental principles of sentencing set out in the
criminal code
?
in some instances, a conditional
sentence with sufficiently onerous conditions can achieve the objectives of
denunciation and general deterrence.
in other circumstances the need for
denunciation is so pressing that incarceration will be the only suitable way in
which to express society's condemnation of the offender's conduct.
the same is true
of deterrence, there may be circumstances in which the need for deterrence will
warrant incarceration."
the supreme court of canada in
proulx
explained:
where punitive objectives such as denunciation and deterrence are
particularly pressing, such as cases in which there are aggravating
circumstances, incarceration will generally be the preferable sanction. this
may be so notwithstanding the fact that restorative goals might be achieved by
a conditional sentence
.
in
r. v. killam
(1999),
1999 canlii 2489 (on ca)
, 126 o.a.c. 281 justice doherty first observed that
a conditional sentence does not, generally speaking, have the same denunciatory
effect as a period of imprisonment. incarceration remains the most formidable
denunciatory weapon in the sentencing arsenal.
more
recently the supreme court of canada, albeit in a different context, stated
that conditional sentences generally indicate less serious criminality than
jail terms.
in
r. v. macintyre-syrette
,
2018 onca 706
, at para.
19
, the
ontario court of appeal indicated that there are circumstances in which the
need for denunciation and deterrence is such that incarceration is the only
suitable way to express society's condemnation of the offender's conduct.
i
am satisfied this is one of those cases. a conditional sentence would not be
consistent with the fundamental principles of sentencing. it would fail to
adequately reflect the principles of deterrence and denunciation.
a conditional sentence would also not be
proportionate to the nature and gravity of the offences he committed.
mr.
pennock’s moral blameworthiness is high, and his offences are grave.  he used
his position of trust as ceo to defraud a significant amount of money from a
charitable organization that serves the most disadvantaged members of society.
he misappropriated funds repeatedly, over an extended period out of greed, to
support his lifestyle. he only stopped because he was detected. i am not satisfied
that there are any exceptional mitigating circumstances which warrant the
imposition of a conditional sentence. while mr. pennock returned the funds he
misappropriated five years after he was terminated, four years after he was
charged and a year after a civil judgment placed restrictions on the home he
owns with his wife, the impact of his offences extends well beyond the money he
stole. the rippling effects of his acts persist to this day.  while jail may
not be called for to satisfy the principles of specific deterrence or
rehabilitation in mr. pennock’s case, jail is called for to meet the principles
of general deterrence, denunciation and to hold him accountable for the harm he
caused.
my
conclusion is that only a sentence of imprisonment in this case could properly
give effect to the fundamental principles of sentencing.
6.
the appropriate length of sentence
in this case
having
determined a conditional sentence is not appropriate in mr. pennock’s case, i will
next turn to the appropriate length of a custodial sentence.
as the case law demonstrates, there is no binding range of sentence
for fraud from an employer in the amount of $
327,045.00
and that has been repaid prior to sentencing.
deterrence
and denunciation are the primary sentencing objectives in a case such as this
one. it is difficult to overstate the seriousness of the offences.
i
must also give some weight to
the principle of restraint, given mr. pennock has tried to right his wrong by
paying back the money he stole.
in all the circumstances of
this case i am satisfied that a fit and appropriate sentence for the fraud
charge is 12 months jail, followed by three years’ probation.
this sentence
is proportionate to both the gravity of the offence and mr. pennock’s moral
blameworthiness. it also does not extinguish his prospects for rehabilitation
or reintegration into society.
having
regard to the principle of totality, i sentence mr. pennock to a concurrent
sentence of 12 months’ jail on the remaining counts.
in
addition to the statutory probation conditions which apply, mr. pennock is
ordered to:
-
report to a probation officer within 48
hours of his release and thereafter as required and comply with all directions
received from his probation officer;
-
attend and participate in any
counselling or treatment sessions arranged or recommended by your probation
officer; and
-
sign any releases that permit your
probation officer to monitor your counselling or treatment.
-
abstain from communicating directly or
indirectly with any employee or volunteer at the john howard society of peel
except through a lawyer;
-
do not seek any employment with a
charitable organization;
-
do not engage in any volunteer work
that involves you handling funds;
-
you shall disclose your criminal record
to any employer or business partner.
released:  january 8, 2025
signed:
justice s. caponecchia
r.
v. suter
,
2018
scc 34
, at para.
4
.
r.
v. bogart
,
(2002)
2002 canlii 41073 (on ca)
,
61 o.r. (3d) 75
at para.
36
.
r. v. wilson
2016 onca 888
at para.
8
.
r. v.
sureskumar
,
2023 onca 705
at para
46
;
r. v.
wells
,
2000 scc 10 (canlii)
,
1 s.c.r. 207
.
r. v dobis
(2002)
2002 canlii 32815 (on ca)
,
58 o.r. (3d) 536
at
para
54
.
r.
v. drabinsky
,
2011 onca 582
at para.
167
.
r. v. knoblauch
,
2000 scc 58 (canlii)
,
2 s.c.r. 780
, at para.
26
.
r. v. proulx
,
scr 61,
at paras. 22, 30, 35-37, 41, 66-67,
102-107.
ibid
at
para. 106.
ibid
at
para.
107.
ibid
at para. 114
.
r.
v. killam
(1999),
1999 canlii 2489 (on ca)
,
126 o.a.c. 281
,at para. 13
tran
v. canada (public safety and emergency preparedness
)
,
2017 scc 50
, at para
s.
28
.