ontario youth court of justice
warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the
following notice be attached to the file:
this is a case under
the
youth criminal justice act
and is subject to subsections
110(1) and 111(1) and section 129 of the act.  these provisions read as
follows:
110.  identity of offender not to be published —
(1)  subject to this section, no person
shall publish the name of a young person, or any other information related to a
young person, if it would identify the young person as a young person dealt
with under this act.
.
.   .
111.  identity of victim or witness not to be
published —
(1)
subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a child or young
person, or any other information related to a child or a young person, if it
would identify the child or young person as having been a victim of, or as
having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed or
alleged to have been committed by a young person.
.
.   .
129.  no subsequent disclosure —
no person who is given access to a record
or to whom information is disclosed under this act shall disclose that
information to any person unless the disclosure is authorized under this act.
subsection 138(1)
of the
youth criminal justice act
,
which
deals with the consequences of failure to comply with these provisions, states
as follows:
138.  offences —
every person who contravenes subsection 110(1)
(identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity of victim or
witness not to be published)  . . .  or section 129 (no
subsequent disclosure)  . . .
(
a
)   is guilty of
an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years; or
(
b
)   is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. t.p.
, 2025 oncj 701
date:
2025 12 12
court
file no.:  toronto #24-y4811743-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
t.p. (a young person)
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on september 16 and november 27, 2025
written
reasons released on december 12, 2025
s. park................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
m. malott............................................................................................................ counsel
for t.p.
jones j.:
i.
introduction
t.p., a young person, as defined in the
youth criminal justice act
,
s.c. 2002, c. 1., pleaded guilty to one count of failing to stop his motor
vehicle and remain at the scene of an accident to offer assistance, despite knowing
that he had been involved in an accident that resulted in bodily harm to
another person, contrary to
criminal code
section 320.16(2).
the crown proceeded summarily.
this is a case about the tragic consequences that accompanied the
impulsive, reckless and dangerous decisions of a teenage driver, and what
constitutes an appropriate response from a youth justice court.
ii.
admitted facts
on monday, november 25, 2024, at approximately
10:29 p.m., t.p. was operating a stolen silver 2017 honda cr-v northbound on
brimley road in the city of toronto. he was 16 years old. he had his g1
driver’s licence. there were three other teenage occupants of the motor
vehicle: r.h., d.g, a.r. and b.g.
t.p. was speeding. pcs king and ellis were positioned in their squad
car on brimley road near lombardy crescent. they captured the speed of t.p.’s
vehicle at 96 km/hr. the posted speed limit was 50 km/hr.
the officer activated their vehicle’s emergency equipment to signal the
suspect vehicle to stop.  the officers learned that the car t.p. was driving
had been reported stolen. they briefly pursued the vehicle, but t.p. was
travelling at such a high speed that they turned off their emergency equipment
and ended the pursuit. they reported their observations over the radio.
a short time later, the officers were informed that the stolen vehicle
had been involved in a collision further north on brimley road.
t.p. struck a white 2021 audi q7 that had been travelling near eglinton
avenue east. the collision caused both vehicles to spin out of control. once
his car came to a stop, t.p. exited the driver’s side. r.h. exited from the
front passenger seat. d.g. escaped through the rear driver’s side door. all
three fled the scene.
a.r. and b.g. were seriously injured and bleeding profusely. emergency
responders extracted a.r. and b.g. from the vehicle, and they were transported
to a nearby hospital. a.r.’s injuries were life-threatening, and she required
immediate surgery.
a
police officer located t.p. and r.h. in a nearby store. they were both injured
and covered in blood. they were placed under arrest and transported to a
hospital for medical treatment.
iii.
background of t.p.
a
pre-sentence report (“psr”) was prepared for the court. i will summarize its
contents in this judgment to best protect t.p.’s privacy rights.
t.p.
was born in toronto. his parents separated when his mother, ms. p. was pregnant
with him. their relationship was unhealthy and caused ms. p considerable
stress. despite the efforts of his parents to co-parent and share
responsibility for his care, t.p.’s relationship with his father largely fell
apart after he turned six years old. despite some sporadic contact over the
years since then, t.p. has not been able to maintain a meaningful relationship
with his biological father.
otherwise,
t.p. reported having a happy childhood. he has a very positive view of his
mother, whom he considers to be loving and caring. he has siblings and enjoys a
good relationship with them.
t.p.’s
experience in school has been disappointing. he is not currently enrolled in
school, having decided to discontinue his attendance. he dropped out of grade 9
after experiencing some negative events at a high school. he was transferred to
another school and skipped class. he was removed from the school due to poor
attendance. after attempts at other forms of educational programming, he was
returned to the second school in 2023. he had another negative experience, this
time with the school principal, and then stopped attending altogether. t.p.
expressed a general dislike of school to the psr author. he may enroll in an
education program to help him earn his ontario high school diploma, as this
will be necessary to achieve some of his career ambitions.
for
now, t.p. has pursued some occupational opportunities, such as at a
construction business. he enjoys that job and has built positive relationships
with his co-workers. his primary focus in the future will be to expand further
in the construction business. he enjoys hands-on learning and activities and
would like to become a crane operator. t.p.’s mother has concerns about his
peer group. many of them have been involved with the youth criminal justice
system, and she believes they may have a negative influence on him. t.p.
disputes this characterization and believes others do not easily influence him.
in
2020, t.p. attended anishnawbe health toronto. he engaged with a therapist and
a psychiatrist over several months. t.p. reported that he did not find the
therapy helpful. he initially attended due to suicidal thoughts, which he
believes he no longer experiences. in july 2025, t.p. participated in the
manifesting amazing dreams (mad) program offered by the canadian training
institute. this program focuses on developing essential skills, promoting
personal growth, and fostering resilience among justice-involved youth. he
completed the program on august 29, 2025. he enjoyed this program and found it
helpful for his choices and future goals.
regarding
the incident that brought him before the youth justice court, t.p. expressed
remorse and regret. he holds a “sense of guilt” for the injuries that everyone
sustained. he describes the accident as traumatic.
iv.
gladue
letter
a
letter was provided to the court by desirée duplessis, senior manager, gladue
caseworker program, aboriginal legal services. ms. duplessis assigned a
caseworker to interview t.p. and his family to prepare a possible
gladue
report.
ms.
p. believed that she was “cree from alberta”, and that t.p.’s father is jamaican.
ms. p. first learned of her indigenous ancestry following her grandfather’s
death in march 2008. she did not know the name of his first nation. the
caseworker was unable to determine if there was meaningful evidence of
indigenous heritage in t.p.’s lineage.
however,
t.p. stated that he learned about his indigenous ancestry and began identifying
as indigenous around the age of 10. ms. p. works for an indigenous organization
and reported that her son has participated in fasts, sweats, and fire keeping
in the community.
t.p.
shared information about his lived experiences, including exposure to community
violence, and a family history of mental health and substance use issues. he
experienced discrimination for being a person of mixed ancestry, but not specifically
for being indigenous.
after
research into what was known about t.p.’s family history, the caseworker was
unable to prepare a formal
gladue
report or letter. ms. duplessis wrote
that t.p.’s “ancestral connection is tenuous at best” and that even if there
was some means by which to confirm the claims of indigenous ancestry, a
caseworker could not address how being an indigenous canadian has affected his
life circumstances.
v.
positions of the parties
both
parties submitted that a four-month custodial disposition followed by a
one-year driving prohibition order was appropriate. they initially differed on
the form that the custodial portion of the sentence should take.
ms.
park submitted that it should be an open custody and supervision order. mr.
malott submitted that a deferred custody and supervision order was both
lawfully available and more appropriate.
after
the conclusion of submissions on november 27, mr. malott informed the court via
written correspondence that his client’s position had changed and that the
parties would now be jointly recommending a four-month open custody and
supervision order.
vi.
law and analysis
young
persons are entitled to a presumption of diminished moral culpability for their
actions:
ycja
section 3(1)(b). that presumption was established by the
supreme court of canada as a principle of fundamental justice under section 7
of the
charter
in
r. v. d.b.,
2008 scc 25
. the significance of
this principle cannot be overstated. young persons are, simply put, “constitutionally
different” from adults for sentencing purposes: see
r. v.
i.m
.,
2025 scc 23
, at para.
89
.
there are important differences between the principles of sentencing
that apply under the
criminal code
and those that take prominence under the
ycja
.
in
i.m.
,
the supreme court explained that the canadian youth criminal
justice system recognizes the “diminished moral responsibility” of young
persons and their “unique developmental circumstances.” these, in turn, will
often justify a “different societal response and approach to their culpability
and sanction”: see para. 97.
but while the
ycja
is premised on the presumption of
diminished moral culpability, it is also founded on the key notion of accountability.
section 38
of the
ycja
states that the purpose of sentencing is to “hold
a young person accountable for an offence through the imposition of just
sanctions that have meaningful consequences for the young person and that
promote his or her rehabilitation and reintegration into society, thereby
contributing to the long-term protection of the public.”
a
sentence must be “proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the young person for that offence”: section
38(2)(c). when arriving at an appropriate sentence, a youth justice court shall
take into account the following pursuant to
ycja
s. 38(3):
(a)
the degree of participation of the young person in the commission of the
offence;
(b)
the harm done to victims and whether it was intentional or reasonably
foreseeable;
(c)
any reparation made by the young person to the victim or the community;
(d)
the time spent in detention by the young person as a result of the
offence;
(e)
the previous findings of guilt of the young person; and
(f)
any other aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to the young
person or the offence that are relevant to the purpose and principles set out
in [
section 38
].
the
offence committed by t.p. was extraordinarily serious, characterized by several
significant aggravating factors. he knowingly chose to drive a stolen motor
vehicle, with four passengers, nearly double the speed limit along a busy
roadway in scarborough. when located by the police, he did not stop and pull
over as required. instead, he made the inherently risky decision to try to
escape capture, only to collide with another car.  he, and he alone, was
responsible for the horrible accident that followed. the accident and the
resulting bodily harm to his passengers constitute entirely reasonably
foreseeable consequences of the decision to drive dangerously on a busy city
street, even for a teenager of t.p.’s age and maturity.
in
i.m.
,
the supreme court explained that the accountability inquiry
mandated under the
ycja
permits the sentencing court to consider the
normative consequences of the offence, the impact of the offence on any victims
or the community, and the availability of rehabilitative and reintegrative
supports within the youth system: see para. 173. the last factor is vital to
remember. accountability, a “cornerstone of youth sentencing”, encompasses
sanctions that must be proportionate and “promote meaningful consequences and
societal
reintegration
”: see para. 170 (my emphasis added.)
t.p.
pleaded guilty, which is an important mitigating factor. a trial would have
required several other young persons to testify, which would have been
emotionally difficult for them. however, in my view, the evidence for the crown
at trial would have been overwhelming.
vii.
gladue
principles
even
in a case such as this one, where extensive and serious bodily harm resulted
from the commission of the offence, a youth justice court must always consider
“all available sanctions other than custody that are reasonable in the
circumstances”, with “particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
young persons”:
ycja
section 38(2)(d). the sentence imposed must
furthermore be the “least restrictive sentence that is capable” of achieving
the sentencing principles mandated by the act, and that is the one “most likely
to rehabilitate the young person and reintegrate him or her into society”, and
also “promote a sense of responsibility in the young person, and an
acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and the community”:
ycja
section 38(2)(e).
while
there is no requirement for a direct causal connection between a young person’s
aboriginal identity and the offences committed, there must be some means by
which to assess how “the systemic and background factors affecting aboriginal
people in canadian society must have impacted the offender’s life in a way that
(1) bears on moral blameworthiness, or (2) indicates which types of sentencing
objectives should be prioritized in the offender’s case”: see
r. v. f.h.l.,
2018
onca 83
, at paras.
31-2
.
there
is little to no evidence presented in this case that would explain how t.p.’s
self-identification as an indigenous canadian can draw a connection, even a
tenuous one, with the systemic and background factors relevant to the
application of
ycja
section 38(2)(d). his belief in his heritage may be
sincere. but more is required for
gladue
principles to affect a youth
court’s sentencing decision, as the court must be able to assess how a young
person’s life experiences in this regard bear on his moral blameworthiness.
viii.
prior sentencing authorities – dangerous driving
reported
sentencing decisions for young persons who have been found guilty of dangerous
driving causing death or bodily harm have often come to very different conclusions,
reflecting the highly individualized nature of youth sentencing. these cases
all accept that such an offence qualifies as a “violent offence” and thus the
requirements of
ycja
section 39(1)(a) have been met. mr. mallot did not
dispute this during oral submissions.
in
r. v. t.m,
2024 oncj 257
, a 16-year-old young person of indigenous and
black canadian heritage pleaded guilty to a count of dangerous driving causing
death. he drove a motor vehicle at 232 km/hr when his vehicle collided with the
victim’s car. the victim suffered life-threatening injuries and died two days later.
t.m. did not have a prior youth court record.
t.m.
brought an application challenging the constitutionality of the provisions of
the
ycja
, which placed restrictions on the availability of a deferred custody
and supervision order (“dcso”).
ycja
section 42(5)(a) provides that if a
young person causes serious bodily harm through the commission of an offence, a
dcso is unavailable.
ycja
section 42(2)(p) limits the length of a dcso
to six months. justice camara found these provisions of the
ycja
unconstitutional
and imposed a dcso of two years less a day.
the
crown appealed the decision, and the court of appeal granted the appeal. the
court held that the restrictions on the availability of a dcso in the
ycja
were constitutional:
r. v. t.m,
2025 onca 436
. the sentence imposed by
the trial judge was therefore illegal. the court of appeal deemed 11 months of
the prior dsco to have been served, and imposed 18 months’ probation, and a
requirement that the young person complete 100 hours of community service: see
para. 10.
many
decisions have held that a form of custody is required for offences of this
magnitude. for example, in
r. v. c.s.,
o.j. no. 3301
, the young
person drove a motor vehicle at speeds of 122-140 km/hr in an effort to pull off
a driving trick (to wit: to “catch air.”)  he had four passengers with him at
the time, and in the dark, drove the vehicle intentionally in a dangerous
manner through an intersection at an “extremely excessive speed”: see para. 72.
he killed a friend who was a passenger.
while
he did not have a prior youth court record, and justice morneau held that the
young person’s rehabilitation and reintegration had to be given prominence, the
objective severity of the offence demanded a custodial sentence. her honour
imposed a nine-month open custody and supervision order, one year of probation,
100 hours of community service, and a three-year driving prohibition order.
in
r. v. c.z.,
2022 oncj 152
, the young person pleaded guilty to two counts
of dangerous driving causing death and one count of dangerous driving causing
bodily harm. he drove his parents’ mercedes at 102 km/hr in a residential area.
he lost control of the vehicle and struck three people standing in a driveway.
two of them were children. he was 16 at the time of the offences, expressed
genuine remorse, and did not have a prior youth court record.
justice
rose held that the offences required consideration of the sentencing principle
of denunciation, even if that sentencing principle is not mandatory and is not
commonly applied in youth courts: see para. 22. while c.z. was a young person,
the harm that resulted from his driving was entirely foreseeable: see para. 36.
justice rose imposed a one-year open custody and supervision order, one year of
probation, and a six-year driving prohibition order.
another
decision that concluded a custody and supervision order is required in cases of
this nature is
r. v. r.r.,
2016 oncj 307
. the 16-year-old young person was
street racing, driving at approximately 130 km/hr in a 60 km/hr designated
zone. he struck and killed an 18-year-old man who was riding his bicycle.
justice
crewe also determined that the sentencing principle of denunciation had to be
factored into his decision. his honour imposed a 10.5-month open custody and
supervision order, one year of probation, 100 hours of community service, and a
five-year driving prohibition order. as noted in the decision, “every street
racer is a potential killer”: see para. 64.
other
youth justice courts have imposed non-custodial sentences despite the often terrible
harm that was caused by a young person’s dangerous driving. in
r. v. a.h.,
2017
oncj 521
, a 17-year-old young person was found guilty after a trial of
dangerous driving causing death. he drove a rental car in a parking lot when he
struck and killed a pedestrian. a.h. had a supportive family, had complied with
his bail conditions, and demonstrated good rehabilitative prospects. he was
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (“asd”) as a child and had a very
difficult upbringing, with multiple surgeries. he struggled to meet standard
developmental goals and had difficulty with social interactions.
justice
copeland (as she then was) found that a.h.’s asd diagnosis was a significant
mitigating factor that impacted a.h.’s moral culpability: see para. 66.  he
could be held accountable for his actions without resort to a custodial
sentence, through a two-year probation order, 100 hours of community service,
counselling, treatment, and a five-year driving prohibition order.
in
r. v. m.w.,
o.j. no. 6256
, the young person drove at a high rate
of speed on eglinton avenue in toronto, while weaving through traffic. he
collided with a vehicle and killed the 73-year-old driver. m.w. remained at the
scene and cooperated with the authorities. he was 17 at the time and had no
prior youth court record. he completed 150 hours of community service prior to
his sentencing hearing.
justice
kelly described the young person as “a young man of exemplary background and
character” with “an unblemished past and likely a very promising future”: see
para. 35. the youth justice court accepted a joint submission for a 12-month
probation order.
ix.
conclusion – the joint position is appropriate
in
r. v. c.d. and r. v. c.d.k.
,
2005 scc 78
, the supreme court held that
parliament’s intent by introducing the
ycja
was to reduce the rate of
incarceration for young persons. this is a foundational principle of our youth criminal
justice system, and one that must be respected. but there are some offences,
particularly those that cause serious bodily harm to their victims, that cry
out for a high degree of accountability from the young persons who commit them.
the magnitude of accountability demanded cannot always be met by a
non-custodial sentence. each case will turn on both the nature of the offence
and the offender's personal characteristics.
the
dangerous driving in this case was done with wanton disregard for the safety of
t.p.’s own passengers, other drivers and innocent members of the public. the
risk that someone might have had their life taken in the accident was plain and
obvious. in
r. v. rawn
,
2012 onca 487
, at paras.
48-9
, the ontario court
of appeal held “[a] motor vehicle can, in a moment of recklessness, be
transformed into an object capable of destroying lives” and, accordingly, the
licence to drive is a privilege that comes with immense responsibility. there
can be no doubt that t.p. grossly abused that privilege by his actions. his
dangerous behaviour endangered the safety of every member of the public in his
path. he nearly killed a.r., who was herself just a teenager and completely at
his mercy as a passenger in the backseat of the stolen car.
i
am mindful not to place undue weight on the gravity of the offence when
determining the appropriate sentence for t.p. the supreme court of canada
explained in
i.m.
that any crime, “however serious in character, tragic
in consequence or troubling in execution, is not inherently indicative of a
young person with the developmental age of an adult”: see para. 143. t.p. was
only 16 years old when he made the terrible series of decisions that culminated
in him colliding with another car, and he cannot be held to an adult standard
of moral responsibility, regardless of the consequences of his actions. nor can
certain adult sentencing principles, such as general deterrence, play any role
in my decision.
that
being said, t.p., while a young person, was old enough to understand that what
he was doing was both wrong and inherently dangerous. furthermore, i may
consider the underlying factual circumstances of his crimes to the extent they
offer insight into his thinking and level of sophistication:
i.m.
at
para.
145
. t.p. may have been a newly licensed driver, but he was aware of the
rules and responsibilities that accompany operating a motor vehicle. the tragic
consequences of his decision to drive so dangerously were entirely foreseeable
to him, even as a 16-year-old. the normative aspects of his conduct are deeply
concerning.
his
moral culpability is further informed by his decision to evade the police and flee
the scene of the accident, where two of his friends were seriously wounded, in
an attempt to evade capture. his behaviour after the offence may be lawfully
considered in this regard: see
i.m.
at paras.
148 and 151
. he was
lawfully obligated to stop for the officers and then to remain at the scene of
the accident and secure help for the injured parties: see
criminal code
section 320.17;
highway traffic act,
r. s.o. 1990, c. h.8, section
200(1). instead, he chose to leave them there, bleeding, while hiding in a
nearby location. that demonstrates both callousness and an enhanced level of
moral culpability, warranting an appropriate response. this conduct also
justifies some weight being attached to the sentencing principle of
denunciation, which may be optionally applied in youth sentencing cases: see
ycja
section 38(2)(f)(i).
youth
justice courts have long recognized that where serious offences resulting in
bodily harm or death have been committed, “the concepts of proportionality,
meaningful consequences and retribution may take precedence over
rehabilitation”: see
r. v. a.a.z,
2013 mbca 33
, at para.
65
;
r. v.
s.n.j.s.,
2013 bcca 379
, at para.
29
. i find the least restrictive sentence
capable of holding t.p. accountable for his actions and promoting a sense of
responsibility in him for his actions and the harm he caused is a four-month
open custody and supervision order, followed by 12 months of probation. an open
custody sentence will simultaneously make t.p. aware of the nature and
consequences of his conduct, while also permitting him to successfully
reintegrate into the community.
a probation order, by itself, would fail to hold him accountable for his
actions and would not be proportionate to his degree of moral culpability for
his actions. such a sentence would fail to bring home to t.p. to severity of
his crime and the devastating consequences he caused to his multiple victims.
there
are more aggravating factors and fewer mitigating factors in this case than in
the reported decisions where youth justice courts have declined to impose a
custodial sentence. it must not be forgotten that he could have easily killed
one of the passengers in his car, and that a.r. required emergency surgery. he
left her there after the crash, gravely injured, while trying to protect
himself from capture. had one of his victims died, the length of time required
in open custody would have been much higher.
the
ycja
requires that provinces provide at least two levels of custody for
young persons who are sentenced to a custody and supervision order. open
custody is qualitatively very different from secure custody. in toronto, these
facilities are smaller residences scattered across the city where youth live
under supervision. however, young persons are permitted to enter the
surrounding community, escorted, and to attend educational programming outside the
open custody facility.
other privileges can be earned with good behaviour. it places fewer restrictions
on an individual’s liberty than a secure custody facility, such as the roy
mcmurtry youth centre.
time
spent in an open custody facility will communicate to the young person that
they have committed an offence, or a series of offences, serious enough to
justify a custodial sentence, thereby holding them accountable through a
meaningful consequence. yet the sentence will provide an opportunity for the
young person’s supervised and controlled release back into the community. where
a custody and supervision order is required for a low-risk youth who is
unlikely to re-offend violently, open custody will typically better reflect the
sentencing goals of the
ycja
and promote the young person’s successful
rehabilitation and reintegration into society than the use of secure custody.
t.p.
is at a very low risk of reoffending, and no evidence was presented to suggest
that he poses a threat to the community. he has successfully complied with the
terms of his release order for over a year. an open custody sentence will also
ensure he remains close to his family and can have contact with them. the four-month
term will be broken down into a sentence of two-thirds custody and one-third
community supervision, as required: see
ycja
section 42(2)(n). this
means t.p. will serve 80 days in open custody, followed by 40 days under
community supervision, subject to terms set by the provincial director: see
ycja
s. 97.
in
order to ensure the least amount of interference to t.p.’s plans for his future
goals, i had considered delaying the implementation of the custodial portion of
this sentence for several months: see
ycja
section 42(12). mr. malott
informed the court that, after reflection, his client decided he would prefer
to begin serving the sentence on december 12. t.p. believed, for reasons i will
not expand upon, that this would cause his mother the least amount of personal
difficulty. i commend t.p. for putting his mother's needs first. that speaks
very well of his developing character.
i
also impose a 12-month probation order. on that order, t.p. is prohibited from
operating a motor vehicle. he must also complete 80 hours of community service.
the probation order commences at the conclusion of his custody and community
supervision order.
i
impose a driving prohibition order for one year, as recommended jointly by the
parties:
ycja
section 42(2)(j);
criminal code
section 320.24(1).
released: december 12, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
i was informed during the proceedings that each of the young persons had been
charged by the police initially and therefore all of their identities are
subject to
ycja
s. 110 publication ban.
the crown disputed that a deferred custody and supervision
order was lawfully available due to
ycja s. 42(5)
(a). i need not decide this
question given the new, joint position presented to the court.
when deciding on the level of custody, a youth sentencing court must follow the
criteria referenced in sections 24.1 to 24.3 of the
young offenders act
,
which are incorporated by reference into the
ycja
:
see
ycja
section
88. ms. park, very fairly, did not argue for a secure custody placement for
t.p. the presumption is for an open custody placement, which i find is entirely
appropriate in this case regardless.
when a youth is found guilty in court
, the ministry of children,
community and social services publishes the information. updated april 15, 2025.
available online:
https://www.ontario.ca/page/when-youth-found-guilty-court
a longer driving prohibition order could have been easily justified.