ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. halabi
, 2025 oncj 175
date:  2025 04 03
court file no.:  windsor
22-81103473
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
sevan halabi
before justice s.
g. pratt
sentencing
submissions heard on 18 march 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 3 april 2025
andrea harris...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ahmad ammar...........................................................................
counsel for the defendant
reasons
for sentence
pratt j.:
on
9 december 2024, i found the offender sevan halabi guilty of one count of
sexual assault.  my reasons for conviction are set out at
2024 oncj 635
.
sentencing submissions were received on 18 march 2025.  these are my reasons
for sentence.
facts
the
facts underlying the offender’s conviction were set out in detail in my trial
decision.  i will briefly summarize the facts here.
on
9 october 2022 the victim k.m. engaged the services of the offender as an uber
driver.  she wanted him to drive her home from a party she’d attended.  rather
than take her home, the offender drove her to an empty parking lot.  he told
her they would have fun.  he parked the car and got into the back seat.  he
moved closer to the victim and forcibly kissed her.  he put his hand under her
dress and touched her vaginal area over her underwear.  he ignored the victim’s
protests.  after he tried again to kiss her and she did not respond, he moved
away from her.  she asked if he would still drive her home and he said no.  she
got out of the car, and he left her in the parking lot.
positions of the parties
the
crown seeks a sentence of 12 months jail followed by three years of probation.
in addition, the crown also seeks various ancillary orders, none of which are
disputed by the offender’s counsel.
for
the offender, counsel seeks a sentence of 6 months jail less one day, followed
by probation.  counsel points to the potentially significant immigration
consequences that may follow a sentence of more than six months.  the
difference between the crown’s position and his position, he argues, can be
offset by a carefully crafted probation order.
the pre-sentence report
i
received a pre-sentence report (psr) authored by probation officer michael
williams.  it provides useful information on the offender’s background and
current circumstances.
the
offender was born in iraq.  he told mr. williams that his family faced difficulty
in their country as they were of chaldean heritage.  he married his spouse in
2009.  they have two sons, aged 10 and 14.  in 2016 the family left iraq and
went to jordan.  they immigrated to canada in 2018.  his wife and children have
since become canadian citizens, but the offender remains a permanent resident.
in submissions, the offender’s counsel advised he was unable to apply for
citizenship because of the charge before this court.
the
offender still has family in iraq.  following the trial in this matter, he
returned to the country to help care for his mother, who was suffering from
poor health.  this sentencing was adjourned to allow him to continue caring for
her, and to return to canada.
in
iraq, he obtained a bachelor’s degree in veterinary medicine.  in canada, he
has studied civil engineering and has worked as a truck driver for the last two
years.  he is satisfied with his current employment.  until the charge before
the court, he was also employed as an uber driver.  that employment has ended.
the
offender disclosed no issue with alcohol or other substances.  this was
confirmed by his spouse, roaa hirmiz.  he is currently under the care of a
doctor and takes medication for depression.
regarding
the offence, the offender maintained his innocence to mr. williams.  ms. hirmiz
also supported this assertion.  of course, the offender is entirely within his
rights to maintain his innocence and i take nothing negative from that.  i do
note that his position, and that of his wife, seems to have changed on this
issue between the psr interview and the date of sentencing submissions.  to me,
the offender said he regrets what happened, has learned a lesson, and that this
will not happen again.  ms. hirmiz spoke on the day of sentencing submissions and
acknowledged the mistake he made and the gravity of his actions.  i don’t know
what happened between the psr interview and the present, but to me the offender
has now expressed remorse.  i have no reason to doubt his sincerity, but it is
a marked change from a report dated 5 february.
the
bulk of the offender’s concern, however, seems to relate not to his offence but
to the effect that offence may end up having on his family.  not unreasonably,
he is concerned for his family’s future.  i’m not sure, based on the psr and
his comments in court, if he truly understands the impact his crime has had on
the victim.
overall,
i find the psr to be neutral or positive.  while i am concerned about his lack
of insight into his offence, the offender has strong family support and no
criminal record.  he has no issues with substances and is employed.  the psr
paints a picture of someone unlikely to be back before the court again.
the victim impact statement
the
victim read her victim impact statement (vis) into the record.  it reveals the
ongoing and pervasive impact the offence has had on her.  she still suffers
from panic attacks and flashbacks.  the offence has hindered her professional
life as a teacher and her personal life as well.  she is fearful and angry.  in
the vis she spoke of the fear she felt in the offender’s car that night.  she
didn’t know if she would be raped or killed, and that fear continues to impact
her life.
to
the victim, i would say this.  your statement eloquently describes the impact
this offence has had on you.  but it also shows a strength and resolve to move
forward.  it will not be easy to do that, but your spirit, which shines through
in your words, will carry you through.  i hope you are able to get the help you
need to continue healing.  i wish you the best.
principles of sentencing
the
criminal code
sets out several principles to guide judges in fashioning fit
sentences.  the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and
foster a respect for the law.  these aims are achieved with sentences that
focus on denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, and reintegration, among
other objectives.
parliament
has directed judges to consider certain specific circumstances as well.  these
include cases where an offence is committed against a vulnerable person (see s.
718.04), or where an offence involves a breach of trust (see s.
718.2(a)(iii)).  both of these factors apply in the present case.  i must
prioritize denunciation and deterrence in the sentence i impose and must
consider the abuse of a position of trust as an aggravating factor.
a
sentence must also be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender, and the court must also consider
alternatives to custody where those alternatives are reasonable in the
circumstances.
caselaw
it
is troubling that sexual offences committed by professional drivers are
sufficiently common that they have created their own body of caselaw.  but that
is what has happened.
both
counsel relied on the cases of
r.
v.
ali
o.j. no. 1126 (s.c.j.)
,
r.
v.
einollahi
2021 onsc 6048
,
r.
v.
kullab
o.j. no. 4884 (c.j.)
, and
r.
v.
ukumu
2021
onca 91
(onca)
.  while each turns on its own facts, the
kullab
decision
provides a very useful summary of the relevant law.
in
kullab
, the offender was working for lyft, a service essentially
identical to uber.  he picked up the victim, who wanted to go to a friend’s
house.  instead, he took her to a different location, parked the car, and got
in the back seat with her.  he touched her breast, leg, and groin area over her
clothing, and tried to touch her breast under her clothing.  he asked if she
wanted to have sex and she said no repeatedly.  she pushed the offender off her
and ran from the car.
kullab
was convicted after a trial.  in sentencing him to six months less one day,
justice monahan reviewed the cases provided to me here.
the
ali
case involved an uber driver who victimized two intoxicated women in
separate incidents.  he touched each woman’s breasts and tried to put his hand inside
the shirt of one of the victims.  he accompanied that victim into her house and
into her bedroom, where he went through her wallet.  the sentencing judge in
that case noted the victims were essentially “helpless” given their
intoxication and that ali had used that fact in choosing them as victims.  ali
was sentenced to 18 months, 20 days jail and three years probation.
in
einollahi
, justice akhtar of the superior court allowed a crown sentence
appeal.  after trial, the offender was found to have forcibly kissed the female
victim in the course of driving her home.  he had dropped her friends off,
leaving the victim alone in the car with him.  he drove to a deserted area and
kissed her without her consent.  he also touched her breasts over her clothes.
not wanting him to know where she lived, she exited the car and he drove off.
the trial judge imposed a 60-day conditional sentence followed by 18 months of
probation.  finding that sentence to be demonstrably unfit, justice akhtar
impose a six-month sentence, minus the original 60-day sentence.
like
in
ali
, the court
in
einollahi
also reviewed several relevant
authorities dealing with drivers who sexually assaulted their fares and cited
several decisions that confirmed such an offence is a breach of trust.
in
the
ukumu
decision, the court of appeal for ontario upheld a 12-month
sentence on an offender who falsely claimed to be an uber driver.  he dropped
off the female victim and her friend, but then called the victim back to his
car on the pretence that she’d left something behind.  when she leaned into the
car to look, he pushed her into the vehicle, climbed on top of her, kissed her,
and rubbed her genitals over her clothing.  she managed to escape the car and
note his license plate.  the court noted, “we cannot say that a 12-month
sentence for a random and violent sexual assault on a complete stranger is
unfit in any way.”  this case is especially noteworthy as ukumu was facing the
potential of immigration consequences as a result of the sentence.  i will
address that point later in these reasons.
a
recent case from the court of quebec also dealt with similar circumstances.  in
r.
v.
vaknin
q.j. no. 10819
, the offender posed as an uber
driver.  he took his victim to a deserted place.  he gave her money and told
her he wanted to spend time with her.  once they’d parked, he digitally
penetrated her and climbed on top of her, kissing and touching her.  he
eventually stopped and drover her back to the city.  after a trial, justice
longo imposed an 18-month sentence.  vaknin had no prior record, was an
otherwise productive member of society, and had apologized to the victim.
overall,
the cases support the crown’s position that the range for offences of this
nature is from 6-18 months custody.  the range reflects the seriousness of the
conduct, the breach of trust, the vulnerability of victims, and the impact the
offence can have on them.  i also note the following passage, from paragraph 10
of
ali
:
moving to the
nature of the sexual assaults, there is no doubt that the more invasive, the
more aggravated is a sexual assault. the obverse does not necessarily follow,
however. sexual assault constitutes an unwanted intrusion into a victim's
bodily integrity and sense of identity. it is often more about the profound and
lasting psychological fallout than about the precise nature of the physical
violation itself: r. v. carrasco
2020 onsc 5308
(ont. s.c.j.) at para.
8
. for
that reason, in evaluating the nature and extent of the intrusion, factors
other than invasiveness are important. these include vulnerability of the
victim, the situation in which the assault took place, and a myriad of other
factors some general, some personal. in the present circumstance, both women
were touched sexually by a stranger while they were in an intoxicated,
unconscious and helpless state. while not as invasive as some sexual assaults,
the complainants' feelings of well-being, safety, security and bodily autonomy
and integrity were badly shaken. women are particularly vulnerable to sexual
assault and are likely to be profoundly affected by the crime.
mitigating and aggravating factors
the
primary mitigating factor in this case is the offender’s lack of a prior
criminal record.  as this is his first offence, i cannot ignore the concept of
rehabilitation.  he has said this was a mistake that will not happen again.  prior
to this point, he had lived successfully in canada since 2018.  that is
important, though i do observe he’d only been in canada for four years when
this offence was committed.
he
has also shown some degree of remorse.  he said he regrets what happened and
that he has learned his lesson.  it’s not clear, however, if that regret stems
from his actions or from the consequences he has brought on his family.  as i
said, it is difficult to reconcile his statement to the psr author with what he
said in court.  in the end, i cannot say there is no evidence of remorse.  it is
not strong, but i cannot say it is absent.
the
offender also has strong family support.  his wife spoke on his behalf and his
uncle and children were present when sentencing submission were made.  on that
point, both children were visibly upset and crying during the proceeding.
respectfully, i question why they were here in the first place.  it was not a
case where their father was in custody and so this would have been a rare
opportunity to see him in person; the offender has been out of custody
throughout this case and only appeared virtually from iraq.  i cannot find they
were brought into the courtroom to engender sympathy from the court but given
the offender’s focus on how my sentence could affect his family, that is
certainly an inference available to be drawn.
in
aggravation, the offender’s breach of the trust placed in him is very
significant.  that trust is obvious in the very nature of the private
transportation industry.  we are told growing up never to get in a car with a
stranger.  we are also told to be careful who we speak to online.  the entire
business model of uber and similar companies is to contact a stranger over the
internet so you can get in their car.  it goes against everything we are taught
and everything we teach about staying safe.  as a result, the trust we
necessarily place in these drivers is enormous.  when that trust is broken with
criminal actions, courts must respond harshly.
the
vulnerability of the victim is another factor i must consider.  the victim was
alone and largely defenceless.  she was in the offender’s vehicle, and he was
driving.  he controlled where they went.  that vulnerability requires me to
prioritize denunciation and deterrence and makes an already bad situation even
worse.
at
paragraph 27 of
r.
v.
jakupaj
n.j. no. 134
, justice mcgrath
of the newfoundland and labrador supreme court general division said this:
canadian
case law supports the crown's position that the sexual assault of young,
vulnerable passengers by a taxi driver is deserving of the public outcry and
abhorrence that ensues. members of the public are entitled to expect that young
people will be free from harm when they place their trust in a taxi driver to
bring them home after a night out with friends.
where
the driver in question is not a municipally licensed taxi driver, but simply
someone with a cell phone who offers rides to strangers, that trust is
magnified.
finally,
i remind myself that the offender exercising his right to a trial is not an
aggravating factor.  while a guilty plea is mitigating, a trial is not
aggravating.
immigration consequences
throughout
sentencing submissions, i was reminded of the offender’s precarious immigration
status.  as i said, he came to canada with his family in 2018.  they left iraq
because of the unrest and instability they experienced.  while his wife and
children have since become canadian citizens, the offender remains only a
permanent resident.  he is, as a result, still subject to the
immigration and
refugee protection act
(irpa).  to determine how, if at all, the interplay of
immigration and criminal law should affect the sentence i impose, it is
important first to set out exactly what the offender’s situation is.
section
34
and onward of the
irpa
deals with admissibility of permanent residents and foreign
nationals in canada.  relevant to this case is section 36, which states:
36
(1)
a permanent resident or
a foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality for
(a)
having been convicted
in canada of an offence under an act of parliament punishable by a maximum term
of imprisonment of at least 10 years, or of an offence under an act of
parliament for which a term of imprisonment of more than six months has been
imposed;
(b)
having been convicted
of an offence outside canada that, if committed in canada, would constitute an
offence under an act of parliament punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment
of at least 10 years; or
(c)
committing an act
outside canada that is an offence in the place where it was committed and that,
if committed in canada, would constitute an offence under an act of parliament
punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of at least 10 years.
here,
the offender has been convicted of sexual assault.  while the crown has
proceeded by summary conviction, that election is irrelevant under the
irpa
.
section 36(3)
states explicitly:
(3)
the following
provisions govern subsections (1) to (2.1):
(a)
an offence that may be
prosecuted either summarily or by way of indictment is deemed to be an
indictable offence, even if it has been prosecuted summarily;
the
offence of sexual assault, when prosecuted by indictment, carries a maximum
sentence in the present circumstances of 10 years jail.  this means that it
meets the definition of “serious criminality” set out in s. 36(1)(a).  by
virtue of the conviction alone, the offender is no longer admissible in canada.
what
follows is not automatic deportation, as many believe.
section
44
of the
irpa
states that an immigration officer who is of the opinion that a
foreign national or permanent resident is no longer admissible may create a
report outlining the facts of the situation.  that report is forwarded to the minister
of public safety and emergency preparedness.  if the minister finds the report
is well-founded, he or she can refer it to the immigration division for an
admissibility hearing.  at that hearing, the immigration division has four
options, one of which is to order the removal of the foreign national or
permanent resident if they are found to be inadmissible.  that order would
remove permanent resident status from the individual in question.
ordinarily,
a removal order could be appealed to the immigration appeal division.  that is
not always the case, however.
section 64
of the
irpa
states:
64
(1)
no appeal may be made
to the immigration appeal division by a foreign national or their sponsor or by
a permanent resident if the foreign national or permanent resident has been
found to be inadmissible on grounds of security, violating human or international
rights, sanctions, serious criminality or organized criminality.
(2)
for the purpose of
subsection (1), serious criminality must be with respect to a crime that was
punished in canada by a term of imprisonment of at least six months or that is
described in paragraph 36(1)(b) or (c).
the
end result of applying the
irpa
to the offender’s case is that he has been
found guilty of an offence of serious criminality.  he is potentially subject
to a removal order.  whether he can appeal that removal or not will depend on
the length of the sentence he receives.  if the sentence is six months or more,
he will have no right of appeal.  this is why he argues for a sentence of six
months less one day.
pursuant
to
s. 72
of the
irpa
, however, the offender could still apply for judicial
review of a removal order by the federal court, even if he did not have a right
of appeal to the immigration appeal division.
courts
have long dealt with how to incorporate immigration consequences into their
sentences, going back at least as far as
r.
v.
melo
1975 canlii 1299 (on ca)
,
o.j.
no. 723 (c.a.)
.  in that case, justice arnup considered the impact of
immigration consequences on whether a court should impose a conditional
discharge.  at paragraph 20, his lordship stated:
in my
view, the fact that a convicted shoplifter may be in jeopardy under the
immigration act is not, in itself and in isolation, a sufficient ground for the
granting of a conditional or absolute discharge.  it is one of the factors
which is to be taken into consideration by the trial court, in conjunction with
all of the other circumstances of the case.  in a case where clearly on the
facts disclosed a discharge would not be granted, the fact that the convicted
person may be subject to deportation is not sufficient to "tip the scales"
the other way and lead to the granting of a discharge.
the
melo
decision
was
cited by justice doherty in the case of
r.
v.
hamilton
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca)
,
o.j. no. 3252 (c.a.)
aff’g
2003 canlii 2862 (on sc)
,
o.j. no. 532 (s.c.j.)
.  at paragraph 156, his
honour stated:
…
the risk of
deportation cannot justify a sentence which is inconsistent with the
fundamental purpose and the principles of sentencing identified in the
criminal
code
.  the sentencing process cannot be used to circumvent the provisions and
policies of the immigration and refugee act.  as indicated above, however,
there is seldom only one correct sentencing response.  the risk of deportation
can be a factor to be taken into consideration in choosing among the
appropriate sentencing responses and tailoring the sentence to best fit the
crime and the offender: r. v. melo [citation omitted].
the
notion that sentencing should not be used as a workaround against immigration
law was repeated by the court of appeal for ontario in the case of
r.
v.
r.b.
2013 onca 36
.
the
supreme court of canada weighed in on the issue in
r.
v.
pham
scc 15.  at paragraphs 14-16, justice wagner (as he then was) observed:
the general rule continues to be that a
sentence must be fit having regard to the particular crime and the particular
offender.  in other words, a sentencing judge          may exercise their
discretion to take collateral immigration consequences into account, provided
that the sentence that is ultimately imposed is proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
the flexibility of our sentencing process
should not be misused by imposing inappropriate and artificial sentences in
order to avoid collateral consequences which may flow from a statutory scheme
or from other legislation, thus circumventing parliament’s will.
these consequences must not be
allowed to dominate the exercise or skew the process either in favour of or
against deportation.  moreover, it must not lead to a separate sentencing
scheme with a de facto if not a de jure special range of sentencing options
where deportation is a risk.
in
pham
, the court also noted at paragraph 11 that immigration consequences
are not, strictly speaking, a mitigating factor, and that incorporating the
impact of those consequences is at least partly aimed at assisting rehabilitation:
in light of
these principles, the collateral consequences of a sentence are any
consequences for the impact of the sentence on the particular offender. they
may be taken into account in sentencing as personal circumstances of the
offender. however, they are not, strictly speaking, aggravating or mitigating
factors, since such factors are by definition related only to the gravity of
the offence or to the degree of responsibility of the offender (
s. 718.2
(
a
)
of the
criminal code
). their relevance flows from the
application of the principles of individualization and parity. the relevance of
collateral consequences may also flow from the sentencing objective of
assisting in rehabilitating offenders (
s. 718
(
d
) of the
criminal code
).
thus, when two possible sentences are both appropriate as regards the gravity
of the offence and the responsibility of the offenders, the most suitable one
may be the one that better contributes to the offender's rehabilitation.
the
thread running through all these cases is that a sentence must be fit,
regardless of collateral consequences to the offender.  allowances can be made
for such consequences, but they cannot come at the cost of an unfit sentence.
specifically
referring to sexual assault, justice trotter of the court of appeal upheld a
nine-month sentence imposed on a permanent resident
in the case of
r.
v.
mckenzie
2017 onca 128
.
the
offender in
kullab
was in a very similar position to the offender.  he
too was a permanent resident whose family had already become canadian
citizens.  his citizenship application had been delayed by the charges he faced.
justice monahan sentenced kullab to six months less a day based largely on the
immigration consequences he faced.  justice monahan described this sentence as
“generous” but “still within the acceptable range.”
result
the
circumstances of this offence are extremely serious.  the offender violated the
victim’s bodily integrity and disregarded her wishes.  he exploited a situation
where he held significant power and control.  the effects of his violation are
severe and long-lasting.  the victim wanted him to driver her home.  instead, he
drove to a deserted parking lot, in the opposite direction from the victim’s
residence.  he got into the back seat of the car.  he forcibly kissed the
victim, sticking his tongue in her mouth despite her obvious resistance.  he put
his hand up her skirt and touched her vaginal area over her clothing.  throughout,
she was saying no.  i must above all denounce his conduct and deter him and
others from engaging in the same behaviour in the future.
that
said, i cannot ignore the prospect he has of rehabilitation.  his lack of a
record shows he can be a successful member of society.  my sentence must punish
his conduct, but not in a way that entirely overlooks other worthwhile
sentencing objectives.  i must also exercise restraint and make a first
custodial sentence no longer than it needs to be to meet the ends of justice.
the
guiding caselaw on this point support the notion of a 6-18 month range.  in my
view, for this offence committed by this offender, the appropriate sentence is
in the middle of that range.
the
offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
he
will be imprisoned for a period of 10 months.
(2)
on
release from custody, he will be bound by a probation order for a period of two
years.  in addition to the statutory terms, the conditions will be:
(a)
report
in person to a probation officer within two working days of your release from
custody, and after that at all times and places as directed by the probation
officer or any person authorized by a probation officer to assist in your
supervision.
(b)
do
not contact or communicate in any way, by any physical, electronic, or other
means, with k.m.
(c)
do
not be within 100m of any place you know k.m. to live, work, go to school, or
any place you know the person to be except for required court attendances.
(d)
do
not possess anything defined in the
criminal code
as a weapon.
(e)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them to the
satisfaction of the probation officer.
(3)
he
will provide a sample of his dna to the windsor police service for inclusion in
the national dna databank, on or before 31 may 2025.
(4)
he
will be prohibited from possessing anything defined in the
criminal code
as a
weapon for a period of ten years, pursuant to
s. 110
.
(5)
while
serving his custodial sentence, he will be prohibited from contacting k.m. in
any manner, pursuant to s. 743.21.
(6)
he
will be required to register under the sex offender information registry for a
period of ten years.
in
light of the custodial sentence, i will waive the victim surcharge.
i
have considered the immigration consequences this sentence may set in motion.
i am not unsympathetic to the offender’s family.  in my view, however, a
sentence of six months less a day for this conduct would be unfit.  it would
prioritize the offender’s personal circumstances over the need to denounce and
deter his conduct and would not be in line with relevant caselaw.  it would be
an inappropriate and artificial sentence imposed only to avoid legitimate
consequences created by parliament.  this is not a case where i am asked to
impose one day less than what would otherwise be a fit sentence.  the sentence
sought by the offender would not reflect the seriousness of his actions or the
impact they have had on his victim.  it would require me to cut the sentence
nearly in half, solely to assist him in avoiding future penalties.  i cannot do
that.
i
further note the offender was a permanent resident when he committed this
offence.  he knew he was in canada as a guest and that his continued presence
here was not assured.  he knew the impact misconduct could have on him and his
family when he assaulted the victim.  he now asks me to impose an unfit
sentence so that his family does not suffer the consequences of his actions.  i
decline.
released:  3 april 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt