ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. mostovoy
, 2025
oncj 148
date:  2025·03·14
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
vadim
mostovoy
judgment
evidence and
submissions heard: march 13,14, 2025.
delivered: march 14,
2025
ms. agatha mapelli.................................................................................
counsel for the crown
mr. frank bernhardt ........................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
mr. mostovoy is charged with impaired
operation of a conveyance and having a blood alcohol level in excess of the
legal limit within two hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance.
the issues for decision:
•
80+ - whether the defence has proved a s 10(b)
implementation breach regarding access to counsel of choice and if so, whether
the breath test results should be excluded.
•
impaired operation – whether the crown has
proved the charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
section 10(b) – counsel of
choice
mr. mostovoy was told on arrest that he
could speak to any lawyer he wished. he didn’t respond to the offer at the
roadside. later at booking he did ask to speak to a lawyer. he was asked if he
had his own lawyer and he answered yes. the officer asked if he’d like to have
them call his lawyer and he said yes.
unfortunately, just after that conversation
the booking audio is lost. some technical issue cut out the audio for a few
minutes before it resumed. during that time there was discussion on this point
– how the officers would implement the request to speak to counsel of choice.
the arresting officer did not recall the
discussion during this period. the staff sergeant is not tasked to supervise
right to counsel and the video shows he was engaged more with data entry at
that time.
the video shows mr. mostovoy was given his
cellphone and he looked through his phone briefly. during that time he was also
speaking with the officers so there was not much time spent looking at the
phone. as he explained, in his business he has contacts for many lawyers so he
wasn’t able to find his family’s lawyer quickly.
he did have a lawyer (counsel at trial) who
had helped in a matter for his ex-wife. when the audio resumed mr. mostovoy
stopped looking on his phone and asked to speak to his wife. that was directly
in the context of looking for contact information for his lawyer. the staff
sergeant explained that he couldn’t use his phone because he was under arrest.
they would phone his wife and explain to her where he was. the staff sergeant
also said that they could call his wife to get the number for the lawyer. mr.
mostovoy didn’t respond to that, but for reasons that aren’t clear the
conversation moved directly to arranging a call for duty counsel.
maybe the officers had reason to offer duty
counsel given the conversation during the muted period, but there’s no evidence
of that from either officer. the only evidence on this point is from the
accused – that he wanted to speak with his own lawyer and took steps including
looking on his phone to obtain the name and number. he suggested a call to his
wife in that context as she would have the number. the video record including
the portions that are audible are consistent with his evidence on this point.
i agree with the defence that the evidence
proves a breach of mr. mostovoy’s s 10(b) right to speak with his counsel of
choice.
section 24(2) – exclusion of
evidence
the crown conceded that if the breach
alleged were proved it would be a serious breach. i agree.
the impact of the breach is attenuated to
some extent by the fact that mr. mostovoy obtained legal advice from duty
counsel. he testified that he wasn’t satisfied with that advice, but he didn’t
complain to pc brennan or the qt. he did however repeat one word, “lawyer” in
answer to questions on the alcohol influence report. he explained that this was
his continued assertion that he would not answer questions until he spoke to
his own lawyer. that explanation makes sense in context. he continued to have
concerns about the process, and he didn’t understand that the conversation with
duty counsel replaced the call to his lawyer that he requested. this factor
also favours exclusion.
the breath sample evidence is reliable and
necessary to the crown’s case. society’s interest in adjudication on the merits
favours inclusion of the evidence.
i agree with the crown that all three
officers were patient, polite and generally helpful to mr. mostovoy throughout
his time with them. as the crown submitted, given their diligence on every
other point, the officers may have had reason not to pursue the call to counsel
of choice. maybe, but the absence of evidence on this important point suggests
otherwise. their diligence overall strongly indicates that this point was
missed, considered abandoned somehow without instruction from the accused.
i find the breath test results must be
excluded.
impaired operation
constable buchanan saw mr. mostovoy’s car
swerve while driving and then stop well past the line at an intersection. he
spoke with the driver and noted signs of alcohol consumption. the accused was
unsteady when he stepped out of his vehicle. the officer thought the accused
was struggling to form a sentence when speaking. he was slow to retrieve his
license which suggested that his physical dexterity was affected by alcohol. he
arrested mr. mostovoy for impaired operation on reasonable grounds.
the in-car-camera (icc) video shows that mr.
mostovoy was able to speak and be understood at the roadside. he searched for
his license in a wallet where both the officer and the accused noted mr.
mostovoy had many cards close together. mr. mostovoy’s car has a hydraulic
system that lowers the car automatically when the driver exits. that may or may
not have had something to do with what the officer observed when he exited the
vehicle.
at booking mr. mostovoy’s speech was fine.
he stood up and down several times as directed by the officers. he was able to
remove a necklace and other jewelry without issue. constable buchanan noted a slight
sway during booking. the sway at that particular moment in the video was
certainly slight, the type of movement that would only be apparent to a person
close-by. the station videos don’t show indicia of impairment consistent with
what was seen at the roadside.
the qualified technician completed an
alcohol influence report which includes a complete review of possible indicia
of alcohol impairment. he noted that mr. mostovoy’s balance and walking were
“fair”. he did not note any slurring of speech or other indicia of impairment.
he did note an odour of alcohol coming from mr. mostovoy which is evidence of
consumption.
i don’t accept mr. mostovoy’s evidence that
the swerves in his driving and his stopping well past the marked line was
caused solely by his use of his cellphone while driving. however, given the
very brief duration of the observations at the roadside and the remaining
evidence over the hours that he was in custody, i find a reasonable doubt
remains.
considering all of the evidence, i find the
crown has failed to prove the impaired count beyond a reasonable doubt.
conclusion
the accused/applicant has proved the s 10(b)
breach alleged. the results of the breath tests are excluded under s 24(2). the
remaining evidence does not prove the 80+ count so that charge is dismissed.
the evidence as a whole did not prove the
impaired operation count beyond a reasonable doubt. that count is also
dismissed.
delivered: march 14, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel