ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. mootoo
, 2025 oncj
650
date:  2025·10·22
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
zoltan
mootoo
judgment
evidence heard: september
23,24,25,26, 2025.
delivered: october
22, 2025
mr. avik ghosh ......................................................................................   counsel
for the crown
mr. david campos ...........................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
police responded to a 911 call for help in
which both a woman and child were heard screaming. the officers were told by
the operator that it sounded like the father had hit the child. the officers
directly entered mr. mootoo’s residence and did a quick visual search looking
for the caller and her daughter. they didn’t find them. it turned out the
caller was in the adjacent house, right beside the mutual wall at the time of
the call. the gps trace had led police to the wrong door.
however, the quick visual search of the
residence did reveal a large-scale drug laboratory on the main floor which was
in active operation pressing pills. mr. mootoo was arrested steps away from
that room. he was the only one in the residence.
mr. mootoo was charged with:
•
1 – possession of a pill press s 7.1 cdsa
•
2 – ftc with probation – keep the peace s
733.1(1)
•
3 – ftc probation – reside condition s 733.1(1)
•
4 – careless storage of ammunition s 86(1)
•
5 – produce metonitazine s 7(1) cdsa
•
6 – possess metonitazine ftp of trafficking s
5(2) cdsa
•
7 – possess bromazolam ftp s 5(2) cdsa
•
8 – possess methylenedioxymethamphetamine ftp s
5(2) cdsa
at the conclusion of the evidence, the
defence abandoned the s 8
charter
application regarding the warrantless entry and search of mr.
mootoo’s residence. it was plain that the police were responding to a dropped 911
call which justified a direct entry to ensure public safety –
r v godoy,
1999 canlii 709 (scc)
, scj no 85. the visual
search of the residence was limited, fast and consistent with the officer’s
purpose. several circumstances suggested to the officers that they had the
right house, including the fact that it was the one with the lights on, there
was some woman’s clothing on the upper floor and there was a room with pink
children’s toys. mr. mootoo said that a woman and child had been in the
residence earlier.
constable berezin took less than a minute
from the time of entry to inspect the entire house. the drug lab was one of the
last rooms checked. i agree with the defence that there was no evidence of a
breach from that search or the later limited public safety search by the
special team that monitored levels of chemicals and checked potential hazards
to the neighbourhood prior to the execution of the search warrant. there was no
challenge to the warrant.
the defence also confirmed that the
charter
application alleging breaches of
sections 9 and 10 referred only to detention and right to counsel prior to
arrest. there is no allegation of breach after arrest. the crown conceded that
counts 3 (ftc – reside) and 4 (ammunition) should be dismissed.
the submissions of counsel identify the
following issues for decision:
•
has the crown proved the drug production and possession
counts alleged beyond a reasonable doubt?
•
has the crown proved the probation breach
alleged (ktp) beyond a reasonable doubt?
•
charter s 9 – arbitrary detention of the accused
during the search
•
charter s 10(a) – failure to advise of reason
for detention
•
charter s 10(b) – failure to provide right to
counsel advice on detention
•
charter s 24(2) – application to exclude
evidence
detention during the search of
the residence – charter ss 9,10,24(2)
the defence submits that the detention of
mr. mootoo during the initial entry and search was arbitrary, contrary to s 9
of the
charter.
mr. mootoo was detained for less than a minute while
p.c. berezin did a public safety search of the rooms in the house. it was
reasonable for p.c. barak to conduct a brief, “pat down” search for weapons
given the details of the 911 call. the evidence showed it was necessary for the
safety of potential occupants and the safety of the officers that mr. mootoo be
detained during the inspection of the house.
the defence submits that mr. mootoo should
have been advised of his right to call a lawyer during the detention prior to
his arrest. section 10 of the
charter
is engaged upon detention. mr.
mootoo was immediately informed of the reason for police entry as required by s
10(a) of the
charter
. p.c. barak asked him if “everyone was ok” and
asked him about the woman and child they were searching for. mr. mootoo said
the woman and child left “ages ago” but of course the police checked.
the evidence of the officers showed that the
advice required by s 10(b) was briefly suspended in a dynamic situation for
safety reasons as the officers tried to determine whether there were injured
parties in the home. once the drug lab was discovered, mr. mootoo was arrested.
he was provided with right to counsel advice and there is no allegation of
breach of sections 8, 9 or 10 of the
charter
after that point.
i find that the officers’ actions were
reasonable and there was no breach of sections 9 or 10 of the
charter.
in
the alternative, even if the brief detention without right to counsel advice
were found to be a technical breach of both sections 9 and 10, that could not
reasonably lead to exclusion of the drug laboratory evidence on the test set
out in
r v grant,
2009 scc 32
. the breach would not be serious where it
was measured in seconds and followed by agreed compliance with the right to
counsel requirement. there would have been a brief impact on the accused’s s 9
right, and no real impact on his s 10 rights. exclusion of the drug lab
evidence as a remedy would be so disproportionate that it would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
proof of the charges – the submissions
of counsel
the crown submits that strong circumstantial
evidence proves mr. mootoo’s participation in the drug lab operation:
•
the lab was not hidden. it occupied the main
room on the main floor.
•
chemical buckets, caps, bottles and labels for
codeine were in the garage where mr. mootoo had been before he answered police
calls.
•
pill press cylinders and stamps were in the
garage and lab room.
•
on the floor of the laundry room right beside
the drug lab there was clothing covered in white dust and a mask on the floor.
•
the lab was in full operation producing pills
when discovered by police.
•
the pill production made a loud noise audible
outside the production room.
•
numerous personal items found in the house show
mr. mootoo was residing there. (visa debit card, puffer/inhaler, ocj driving
suspension, bmw parts invoice, toronto parking penalty notice, auto-speed
infraction notice, red light camera infraction notice, mot notice, ocj
undertaking – all bearing the name zoltan mootoo.)
•
mr. mootoo was the only person in the residence.
•
the high value of the illegal drug lab and its
contents which would not be entrusted to someone not part of the scheme. (expert
evidence showed that the total value of the drugs seized was approximately
$2,577,000.)
the defence submits that the crown has not
proved mr. mootoo was in possession of the drugs for several reasons:
•
mr. mootoo was present, but he was not covered
in white dust. dust filled the air in the lab room.
•
the drug lab was concealed. “we have to assume
that nothing indicated to the accused that this was a drug lab.”
•
the packaged drugs and many of the drug production
items found about the house were not in plain view.
•
while there are many items bearing the accused’s
name in the house, there are other items with the names of other people,
including one passport.
•
missing evidence - the crown did not provide fingerprints
or dna linking mr. mootoo to the lab. there was no cellphone extraction
analysis of his phone. the crown did not show any evidence as to who owns the
house.
•
mere presence at the scene of an offence does
not prove participation.
mere presence
in my view there are two errors that must be
avoided when assessing evidence of the accused’s presence at the scene of an
offence. the first starts with the observation that in many cases “mere
presence” has been found by courts to be insufficient to prove participation in
an offence. the error is to then conclude that presence is a category of
evidence which has been found by appellate courts as a matter of law to always be
insufficient to prove participation in an offence. the argument therefore
assigns a zero value to the fact of presence in any analysis.
presence at the scene of an offence is a
circumstance. as a circumstance it rarely stands alone. as with all circumstantial
evidence, the value of that evidence depends on the context. mere presence at
the scene of an illegal prize fight held outdoors by a major road without
evidence of active participation did not prove the bystanders were parties to an
offence by aiding or abetting –
r v coney,
(1882) 8 qb 534, cited in
r
v dunlop and sylvester,
1979 canlii 20 (scc)
, scj no 75 at para
13
. on the other hand,
unauthorized presence inside the cash room of a closed store in the dead of
night with alarm bells ringing may well lead to a different conclusion. while i
agree with the defence that there are many cases where courts have found that “mere
presence” at a crime scene is insufficient proof of participation in an offence,
the fact of presence remains a relevant circumstance to be considered in the assessment
of all of the evidence at trial. see for example:
r v puentes-reed,
2025
onca 441
at para
41
.
in cases of alleged possession, there is a second
concern related to presence and occupancy of a residence. a court cannot
presume that an occupant in a place such as an apartment is necessarily deemed
to be in possession of all items within that place. applying a presumption that
an occupant was in possession of items found beside another person in another room
“unless he could rebut that presumption” reversed the burden of proof on the
central issue –
r v watson,
2011 onca 437
.
analysis
in the principal case relied upon by the
defence, the trial court held that presence at the doorway of a room with
minimal other evidence linking the accused to that room did not prove he knew
there was a gun concealed within clothing in the closet –
r v turner,
2012
onca 570
. in that closet the police found passports belonging to two other
people, although both denied knowledge of the gun.
the
turner
case and others cited by
the defence are quite different from the facts in this case. this was not a true
residence where illegal items were found as was the case in
turner
and
watson
.
this was a large-scale drug production lab with evidence of living quarters on
the upper floor. the lab was in operation, and the machinery was producing
pills when the officers entered. the noise of the operation was audible on the
main floor. the accused was the only person in the residence and the sudden, unexpected
entry of the police did not leave time for anyone else to flee.
mr. mootoo was not covered in white dust
which he might have been if was found in the production room. instead, he
emerged from the garage where supplies for the production were kept. a mask and
clothing covered in dust was on the floor by the washer and drier.
i disagree with the defence that nothing
would have indicated to the accused that this house was a drug lab. the tarp
only partially covered the production room and there was drug equipment and
chemicals in the main area. there was drug related clothing on the laundry room
floor. mr. mootoo’s possessions were upstairs in the residence area, and he was
present in the main floor which was devoted to drug production. even though the
packaged drugs outside the production room were not in the open, considering
all of the evidence it is simply not possible that an adult person in that
residence would not be aware of the drug production operation.
the defence is correct that there were items
found in the house that had other names on them. the mailing packages with
shipping labels from china and the united states showed sender and receiver
names for other persons. the drug production context makes it highly unlikely
that any of those names are real. i can place no weight on the finding of those
names, nor does a credit bureau letter sent to another address with the name
“shirley mootoo” found among mr. mootoo’s personal items reasonably indicate an
alternate suspect. i agree with the defence that the passport might suggest the
possible involvement of someone else in the enterprise, but even if others were
involved that would not assist mr. mootoo on these facts.
given the high value of the drug inventory
and the drugs being produced and the secretive, illegal nature of the
enterprise, it’s reasonable to infer that presence in that residence was
restricted to those involved in the operation and those who knew them. mr.
mootoo had sole control of the premises at the time the police entered.
a commercial pill press cannot fill itself
with controlled substances, and it cannot turn itself on. i find the circumstances
cited by the defence do not reasonably leave a doubt, nor is any doubt left on
the evidence as a whole. the crown has proved that the evidence reasonably leads
to only one conclusion – mr. mootoo was operating the pill production lab at
the time of his arrest, and he had possession of the drugs and drug making
equipment that was seized by the police.
the fail to comply charge
it was agreed that mr. mootoo was subject to
a probation order with a condition to “keep the peace” at the time of arrest.
the finding on the drug charges proves the breach alleged in count 2.
conclusion
counts 3 and 4 are dismissed. there will be
findings of guilt on the remaining counts.
delivered: october 22, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel