ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. pusey
, 2025 oncj 1
date:
2025 01 02
court
file no.:  central east - newmarket -
20-05535
between:
his majesty
the king
— and
—
david
pusey
before
justice a. a. ghosh
heard
on september 5, october 2, november 7, 2024
reasons
for sentence
released
on january 2, 2025
j. arvizu................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
j. goldglass.................................................................................. counsel
for the defendant
ghosh j.:
overview:
david pusey was found guilty after trial for “possessing
a loaded firearm” (s.95) and “possessing a firearm contrary to a prohibition”
(s.117.01), contrary to the
criminal code
.
i initially provided oral reasons
for sentence with these written ones to follow.
a search warrant was executed at a house
believed to be associated with the offender. he was arrested just outside of
the residence. upon a secondary search of the property, police located a loaded
firearm, concealed in a bag of yard waste in the backyard.
earlier, a wiretap authorization had been issued
on a larger project, and police intercepted phone calls and messages from a
phone believed to be associated with mr. pusey. i found that intercepted calls
revealed that mr. pusey, over the day or so prior to the executed warrant and
arrest, had been urgently trying to obtain a firearm.
the crown seeks a global five (5) year sentence.
the defence submits i should consider (without noting) his presentence custody
for an unrelated murder charge to impose a sentence of less than six (6)
months, to navigate an immigration concern.  these are my sentencing reasons.
summary of the evidence:
on april 25, 2020, police conducted surveillance
on a residence in sudbury. they planned to execute a search warrant on that
property, expecting to locate a firearm associated with david pusey. the
grounds supporting the warrant included wiretap interceptions of phone calls
connected to the defendant.
police observed mr. pusey exiting the front door
of the residence
and lighting a
cigarette. he began to walk down the street when greater sudbury tactical
police officers arrested mr. pusey for “weapons dangerous” and “possession of a
prohibited weapon”.
a couple of hours after the arrest, detective
dan milliard of the york regional police service conducted a secondary search
of the residence. this was an interjurisdictional investigation. given his
understanding of the relevant interceptions, he was confident the firearm was
somewhere on the property, and likely in the backyard.
the detective participated in searching the
interior of the house again. he went outside to search the backyard. detective milliard
sensed that the bags of yard waste had not been searched, as they appeared
relatively undisturbed. he began to empty the bags. the second bag contained a
knotted white plastic bag. inside of it was a second black bag, containing a
black t-shirt. the t-shirt was wrapped around a loaded firearm.
the seized firearm was a restricted .22 long
rifle. it was loaded with a magazine that contained six cartridges of
ammunition. audio interceptions of conversations from a cell phone associated
with mr. pusey were tendered in evidence along with an agreed statement of fact
framing aspects of the interceptions.
circumstances of the offender:
david pusey is a 29-year-old black man with a
criminal record. he was found guilty of “robbery” in 2015 and sentenced to 134
days with probation. in 2017, he was found guilty of “possession of property
obtained by crime” and received a $300 fine.
a presentence report was generated. mr. pusey
did not provide any contact details for family or friends, so the report relied
mostly on information received from the offender. he arrived from jamaica in
2011 and is a permanent resident.  the offender shared that he observed a lot
of violence in jamaica. his parents had separated at some point, although he
did not recall when. he has one sibling and several half-siblings.
his mother is a librarian in jamaica, while his
father works in construction and renovation here in canada. mr. pusey was
expelled from high school after a fight. he worked for a time as a welder.  he
is unsure about his “future ambitions”, perhaps informed by the realities of an
unrelated and more serious charge he is facing.
positions on sentence:
the crown seeks a global five (5) year sentence,
to be broken down to four (4) years for the s.95 “loaded firearm” offence and one
(1) year consecutive for the “breach of weapons prohibition” offence. mr. pusey
had bail on these charges, so there are only seven (7) days of presentence
custody to consider in the crown’s submission.
defence counsel submits that i should impose a
sentence of six (6) months, less one day, to navigate the immigration issue. he
risks being deported with no right of appeal if he receives a sentence of over
six months. to support such a sentence well below the range, i am invited to
consider (without noting) the significant post-offence presentence custody he
has served for an unrelated murder charge.
applicable principles of sentencing:
the objectives of sentencing are codified in
section 718
of the
criminal
code
.
the principles of denunciation, and specific and general deterrence
are the central sentencing objectives for firearms possession.
mr.
pusey is a young black man facing his first penitentiary sentence. restraint, rehabilitation,
and reintegration must be considered as well.
section
718.1 directs that the sentence imposed must be proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. i also apply the
principle of parity codified in section 718.2(b).
aggravating and mitigating factors:
the following aggravating facts have been proven
beyond a reasonable doubt:
i.
“
true crime” loaded firearm offence
– mr.
pusey was urgently attempting to obtain a firearm on short notice. he told the ostensible
gun trafficker that he planned to “use it”, supporting the only reasonable
inference that he was informing the seller that he either intended to brandish
or discharge it.
ii.
criminal record
–
the offender has a criminal record, notably for “robbery” where he served 134
days in custody. the other entry was for “possession of stolen property” where
he received a fine.
iii.
concealment in a private but outdoor space
– mr. pusey concealed the firearm in a bag of yard waste in the
backyard. it was readily and dangerously ascertainable by others, even if
inadvertently.
iv.
possession contrary to a prohibition
– it is not aggravating, per se, that he possessed a loaded firearm
contrary to a prohibition order. there is no “double-dipping” of aggravating
factors that lie at the heart of each distinct offence. however, there is a
compounding effect on the overall length of sentence that simply extends the
duration of custody that is required.
the following mitigating factors have been
proven:
i.
black offender and judicial notice of
systemic factors
– the defence originally pursued
an “enhanced presentence report”, but that was abandoned for a conventional psr.
this choice was informed by significant resource limitations and a prohibitive
and related backlog. i recommended to the author of the psr that the offender
be asked appropriate questions regarding the “impact of race and cultural
assessments” (irca) on criminogenic risk factors relevant to mr. pusey and his
experience. the relevant questions were asked. mr. pusey was reticent and
circumspect throughout the entire process, perhaps understandably to preserve
his right of appeal. however, he managed to share that he felt discrimination
“all the time”, and that racism and a “fight” may have informed his expulsion
from grade eleven.
ii.
presentence custody
– he only spent seven (7) days of presentence custody on these
charges before being released with conditions. however, he was arrested later
for an unrelated murder charge and has remained in custody since. i am asked to
also apply the time spent in custody for the homicide “as a result of the
offence”, as permitted by s.719. the crown is opposed.
iii.
immigration status
– mr. pusey is a permanent resident from jamaica. he was already
once ordered deported due to the robbery sentence, but he successfully appealed
and was granted a stay of the removal order. if he receives a sentence here of
six (6) months or more, he will likely be deported without any right of appeal.
discussion:
a.
presentence custody for post-release homicide
charge inapplicable
mr. pusey only served seven (7) days of
presentence custody before he was released on bail. he was later arrested for
an unrelated first-degree murder offence and has been in custody for over a
year. despite the appealing submission that i should be able to draw from the
presentence custody related to the homicide, the law does not permit it here.
while theoretically i may consider time spent in
custody for unrelated charges in a limited way, it is only to understand “the
complete picture” of the offender.
i accept mr. pusey completed anger management and high school courses while in
custody. however, using time served on unrelated charges for a quantified
deduction “as a result of the offence” (s.719) is either impermissible or
improper here for other reasons.
these firearm charges did not contribute to his
detention for murder,
which is still pending. the release order on the firearm charges was understandably
not cancelled due to the homicide, pursuant to s.524. i am not aware of any
application for release on the new charge.
uniquely, a s.469 murder charge requires an
automatic detention order, capable of being displaced by a successful
application for release in superior court. this separates and compartmentalizes
the homicide and firearm cases. the related presentence custody for the
homicide cannot or should not be extracted for this matter.
b.
applicable sentencing range – loaded firearm
while on prohibition
possession of a loaded restricted firearm while
subject to a weapons prohibition will attract a global sentence in the
penitentiary. in “most cases”, even mere possession of a loaded firearm in a
“true crime” case like this will render a penitentiary sentence “necessary”. in
some of these cases, a sentence near a maximum reformatory sentence approaching
two years will be appropriate for possession of a loaded firearm.
the culpability spectrum spans from the
technical or regulatory to more serious “true crime” offending. this is
undoubtedly a “true crime” loaded firearm case, given mr.  pusey
explicitly stated his intention to “use it”. there were drugs found in the home
solely occupied by him at the time of arrest, but i decline to find he
possessed the drugs, or that the firearm was connected to drug trafficking. the
crown chose to only prosecute him for the firearm.  mr. pusey’s invocation to
“use” the firearm is enough.
it is agreed that a significant custodial term
is required. in 2015, the supreme court confirmed our court of appeal’s
decision to strike down the three-year mandatory minimum for possessing a
loaded prohibited firearm in
r. v. nur
.
since then, first-time offenders in our province have received sentences
ranging from high reformatory to 2 to 5-year penitentiary sentences. that is
without the violation of a firearm prohibition in place, which clearly requires
a lengthier total quantum of custody.
i note for illustration that in december of
2023, the maximum sentence for “possession of a loaded firearm” increased from
10 to 14 years. i suspect that we may receive appellate direction in time of an
“upward departure” from past sentencing ranges to reflect parliament’s
intention that related sentences must increase.
with that observed, i accept that mr. pusey must receive the “benefit of the
lesser punishment” available at the time that he committed the offence.
the following sentences support or signal a deterrent
penitentiary sentence above three (3) years for offenders possessing a loaded restricted
firearm contrary to a prohibition:
r. v.
mansingh
, ca
: the ca upheld a 43-month sentence for
a first-time offender possessing a loaded handgun. the offender was not subject
to a weapons prohibition. he threw the firearm as he ran from the police,
leaving it in a place easily discovered by others. the court upheld the finding
that this was a “true crime” firearm offence, deferring to the finding that the
offender was involved in low-level drug trafficking.
r. v.
mohiadin
,
court of appeal: the court of appeal
confirmed the original crown submission of three (3) years for a 19-year-old
first time offender in possession of a loaded firearm. the offender was found
by police, sitting in a parked car, smoking cannabis.  the youthful offender
lived with gun violence in his neighbourhood, having witnessed it and lost his
brother to it.  he had good rehabilitative prospects.
r. v. patel,
ontario superior court of justice: the sentencing
jurist imposed a global four (4) year sentence for a 25-year-old offender with
a record for theft, assault with a weapon, drug trafficking, breach of release
order and breaking and entering. the offender ran from police as they attempted
to execute a warrant for him. he received a three (3) year sentence for
possession of a loaded firearm, and a one (1) year consecutive term for
violating a weapons prohibition.
r. v
.
mahamet-zene
,
ontario superior court of justice: a 42-month
sentence was imposed for a 24-year-old first-time offender found in possession
of a loaded firearm in an innocuous social setting. there was no conflict or drug
trafficking animating the facts. he hailed from regent park, a neighbourhood in
toronto known for its socioeconomic challenges, including gang operations and
gun violence. the young, black offender had excellent rehabilitative prospects,
having graduated from seneca college with a computer systems diploma, and was completing
a related co-op at a toronto university. he lost his employment in i.t. at a
bank because of the offence.
r. v. nur
,
supreme court of canada:
while this supreme court decision is
known for the striking down of the mandatory minimum sentence of three (3)
years for possession of a loaded firearm, the 40-month sentence itself was
upheld. mr. nur was a 19-year-old, black, first-time offender who pleaded
guilty to possession of a loaded firearm. he discarded the weapon as he ran from
the police.
a s.117.01 breach of a weapons prohibition often
will attract a consecutive sentence to the firearm possession offence in the 6–12-month
range. in the rare case that sentence is only imposed for the breach, the
related facts may support a similar penitentiary range reserved for a “true
crime” loaded firearm case.
c.
sentencing analysis and conclusion
the crown position of five (5) years is fair and
restrained. mr. pusey had previously served a reformatory term of custody for
robbery. this is a “true crime” loaded firearm offence and committed contrary
to a weapons prohibition. no sentence short of a penitentiary sentence is
available, despite the presence of some mitigation and a stark collateral
consequence on the immigration front.
mr. pusey is again rendered inadmissible to
canada for “serious criminality” and will have no right of appeal, given i must
impose a custodial sentence of at least six (6) months.
he already had an existing
removal order that had been stayed upon review, all stemming from his previous robbery
conviction and sentence.
i have earlier found that the law does not
permit me to consider the post-offence presentence custody accumulated for an
unrelated murder charge. aside from the legal prohibition to its use, it is
additionally impermissible to use it to navigate the immigration issue.
this admittedly serious collateral consequence cannot
overwhelm the analysis for a fit and proportionate sentence, proposed by the
defence to be years below the proper range. to do so would thwart the intention
of parliament in constructing the inadmissibility regime in the
immigration
and refugee protection act
.
there is appellate authority supporting this
specific finding.
i have also considered the evidence in
mitigation that mr. pusey may have experienced anti-black racism and that this
may have informed his involvement in crime.   i accept there is a dearth of
evidentiary support for such findings, informed by his reticence during the presentence
report process.
i take judicial notice that his arrival and maladjustment
from jamaica informed his limited academic and work trajectory. he mentioned he
has experienced discrimination during his time in canada. i also accept that
his neighbourhood dealt with gun violence, and that being black, marginalized,
and of limited means informed his engagement with the criminal justice system.  this
mitigation, too, cannot overwhelm the analysis.
i have determined that the fit global sentence
is four (4) years in the penitentiary, less credit of seven (7) actual days of presentence
custody. i will credit him for 14 days, applying
summers
and
marshall
credit for harsh presentence custody conditions.
the global sentence of (4) years will be
apportioned as follows:
(1)
three (3) years: “possession of a loaded
restricted firearm” - s.95
•
less credit or mitigation of 14 days
[7 real days: enhanced to 11 days (
summers
)
plus 3 days off gross (
marshall
)]
(2)
one (1) year consecutive: “possession contrary
to prohibition” - s.117.01
(3)
s.109 weapons prohibition for life
(4)
dna - secondary designated for the s.95 offence
my thanks to counsel.
________________________
signed:
justice a. a. ghosh
r. v. pammett
,
2016 onca 979
, paras.
18-25
;
r. v. john
,
2020 onsc 5171
, paras.
30-33
r. v. morris
,
2021 onca 680
, at para.
151 and 177
;
r. v. smith
,
2023 oj no. 4162
r. v. nur
,
2015 scc 15
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
charter of rights and freedoms,
s.11(i)
r. v. mansingh
,
2017 onca 68
;
r. v. mohiadin
,
2021 onca 122
;
r.
v. patel,
2019 onsc 6302
;
r. v. mahamet-zene
,
2018 onsc 1050
;
nur
r. v. chambers
,
2013 onca 680
,
r. v. gorgievski
,
2024 onsc 5899
;
r.
v. pinard,
2024 oj no 3256
immigration and refugee protection act
, ss. 36(1)(a)
atwal v. canada, (minister of citizenship and immigration)
,
2004 fc 7
, para.
15