ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. goodenough
, 2025 oncj 74
date:  february 11, 2025
information no.:  23-23107633
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jeremy
goodenough
before justice j. miller
heard on
january 14, 2025
reasons for judgment released on february 11, 2025
ms. l. ducharme ....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ms. s. rouble .........................................................................................   counsel
for the accused
reasons for
judgement at trial
miller j.
introduction
mr. jeremy goodenough
is before me on one information number 23-23107633
that alleges he, on or about the 1st day of november 2023, committed the
offence of possessing child pornography contrary to
s.163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code
.
the accused pleaded not guilty, and this matter proceeded to trial
in front of me on january 14, 2025.
i heard from two witnesses in this case.  the crown called a
single police officer who seized a doll from the residence of mr. goodenough on
november 1, 2023.  this doll is the alleged child pornography in this case, with
the crown alleging it meets the legal definition of child pornography and that
mr. goodenough was knowingly in possession of it.
the defence also called a single witness, mr. goodenough, who took
the stand and admitted possession of the doll but disputes that it meets the
legal definition of child pornography. if it does, he says he did not avert to
the qualities of the doll that could make it child pornography, and thus, he is
not guilty of possession of child pornography.  finally, mr. goodenough also
argues that should the court find that the elements of the offence are proven
beyond a reasonable doubt, he shouldn’t be convicted because one of the
sharpe
exceptions applies.
several critical legal principles must be considered to resolve
the issues in this case.
the law
the presumption of innocence and proof beyond a reasonable doubt
the
first and most important principle in any criminal case is that, like any
person accused of a criminal offence in canada, mr. goodenough is presumed
innocent of these charges, and the crown must prove his guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.  the burden never shifts and remains with the crown
throughout.
a
reasonable doubt is not based upon sympathy or prejudice but upon reason and
common sense that is logically connected to the evidence or the lack of
evidence. a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. the crown
does not need to prove the offence to an absolute certainty since that would be
an unrealistically high standard.
finally, the beyond-a-reasonable
doubt standard applies to the evidence as a whole, not individual pieces of it.
because
the accused testified in this matter, i must apply the supreme court of canada’s
principles in
r. v. w.(d.)
.
in that case, the court encouraged a
specific reasoning process to ensure that a trial court does not accidentally
reverse the burden onto the accused at any point during a criminal trial.
the
principles, simply put, are as follows:
•
first, if i believe the evidence of the accused in this case, which
is a denial of the offences, i must find him not guilty.
•
second, even if i don’t believe the accused’s evidence, if i am
left in reasonable doubt by his evidence, i must also find him not guilty.
•
finally, even if i totally reject the accused’s evidence, i must
still determine whether on the evidence i have accepted, the crown has met
their high onus of proving the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
there
is no formulaic way to apply the
w.(d.)
test.
while evidence given by
witnesses must be assessed on the whole of the evidence in a case, a judge must
start somewhere to explain their conclusions in a matter.  the judge is not
required to proceed in the step-by-step manner laid out
in
w.(d.)
.
however, they may do so.
the
assessment of witness testimony
critically,
i must be mindful of the essential principles related to assessing the
credibility of witness testimony.   when assessing credibility, i am focused on
whether the witness is being honest.
in
weighing credibility, i consider whether what the witness says makes sense and
accords with common sense and logic. is the witness internally and externally
consistent? do they have an apparent motive to lie? does other material
evidence support or contradict the witness' evidence? these are but some of the
considerations that come into play.
apart
from assessing credibility or whether i believe the witness is genuinely being
honest, i must also focus on the important issue of reliability. when assessing
reliability, i must assess the witness' ability to observe, recall and recount
events accurately. generally, a witness who lacks credibility cannot give
reliable evidence. an unreliable witness, however, may still be credible.
in
weighing the evidence of the witnesses, i have considered what i view to be
objective measures of reliability, such as the plausibility of the evidence,
whether it was internally and externally consistent, and the witnesses' ability
to recall events.
i
have assigned little weight to the demeanour of the witnesses as it can be an
unreliable indicator of credibility or reliability.
applying
these principles, i may accept some, all, or none of what any witness says.
in making my findings, i can rely on common sense assumptions
based on my life experiences and acquired knowledge of human behaviour.  however,
i am to exercise caution about making ungrounded assumptions that are not based
on the evidence. if they are obviously untrue and plainly observable, they constitute
a palpable and overriding error warranting appellate review.
the elements of the offence
possession of child pornography requires that the crown prove
beyond a reasonable doubt:
i.
the material in question is child pornography
ii.
the accused “possessed” it; and
iii.
the accused knew or was wilfully blind as to the nature of the
pornography
.
as the accused agreed he was in possession of the doll on the date
of the offence at the outset of this trial, and admitted to being in possession
of it when he testified, i need only concern myself with the law related to elements
i. and iii. above.
the definition of “child pornography”
section 163.1
of the
criminal code
defines the term “child
pornography” as follows:
163.1
(1) in this section, “child pornography” means
(a)
a
photographic, film, video or other visual representation, whether or not it was
made by electronic or mechanical means,
(i)
that shows a person who is or is depicted as being under the age
of eighteen years and is engaged in or is depicted as engaged in explicit
sexual activity, or
(ii)
the dominant characteristic of which is the depiction, for a sexual
purpose, of a sexual organ or the anal region of a person under the age of
eighteen years; or
(b) any written
material, visual representation or audio recording that advocates or counsels
sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an
offence under this act;
(c) any written material
whose dominant characteristic is the description, for a sexual purpose, of
sexual activity with a person under the age of eighteen years that would be an
offence under this act; or
(d) any audio recording
that has as its dominant characteristic the description, presentation or
representation, for a sexual purpose, of sexual activity with a person under
the age of eighteen years that would be an offence under this act.”
what is a visual representation
?
in
r. v. sharpe
, the supreme court noted that “visual
representation” was a broad term and included any non-textual representation
that could be perceived visually.  the court provided drawings, paintings,
prints, computer graphics and sculptures as examples.
numerous cases, considering the breadth
described in
sharpe
,
have determined that dolls constitute a “visual representation” for the
purposes of
s.163.1(1)
of the
criminal code
.
determining the dominant characteristic
in
sharpe
, the supreme court of canada determined that the
proper approach to determining the
dominant
characteristic of the visual representation required a qualitative assessment
of it based on what an objective, reasonable person would perceive
.
determining if it is for a sexual purpose
in
sharpe
,
the court similarly determined that the
assessment of whether the visual representation depicts for a sexual purpose is
determined objectively.  would a reasonable person perceive the material as
being intended to cause sexual stimulation to at least some viewers?
what is a “sexual organ”?
in
sharpe
,
the supreme court decided not to definitively
determine what constituted a sexual organ other than to suggest a more
restrained approach such that it wouldn’t include things such as eyes and lips.
however, it is noteworthy that parliament did not use the term “genital
organ”, which is used in other sections of the
criminal code
, which
suggests it was not intended to be restricted to only genitals.  it seems
indisputable that however broad or narrow the definition may be, it does
include a human’s external genital organs, the penis and scrotum, as well as the
vulva.
determining if the person depicted is under the age of eighteen
in
sharpe
,
the supreme court stated that a determination
related to the age of the person depicted requires an objective assessment.  this
will be met if the evidence shows that the person depicted is, in fact, under
the age of eighteen, or if a reasonable person looking at the representation
would perceive the person as being under the age of eighteen.
when the section uses the term “person”, as alluded to above in
the law governing what “visual representations” are covered by the section, it
is not limited to just actual flesh and blood human beings.  the term captures
both actual and imaginary people.
what does it mean to “know the nature” of an item
when the court speaks of knowing the nature of an item or its
character, it is not suggesting that the evidence needs to prove that the
accused knew the item meets a legal definition, such as child pornography.  a
mistaken belief about whether an item meets a legal definition or not constitutes
an error of law, which
s.19
of the
criminal code
expressly prohibits as
a defence.
instead, what this language means is that the accused must be
aware of, or willfully blind to, the general quality of the thing that might
make it child pornography.
wilful blindness is a state of deliberate ignorance and may
substitute for actual knowledge.  it occurs when a person is subjectively aware
of the need for some inquiry but deliberately refrains from it to remain
ignorant.
the sharpe exceptions
in
sharpe
, the supreme court of canada determined that
parliament meant the child pornography provisions to
catch
all material that posed a reasoned risk of harm to children where
the countervailing right to free expression or the public good does not outweigh
the risk of harm.
the court found the provisions as drafted initially, however,
overstepped in infringing the s.2(b)
charter
right to freedom of expression,
as they prohibited two narrow categories of privately held materials that
related to the development of thought, belief, opinion, and expression while
posing “
no reasoned risk of harm to children
”.
the court decided to “read in” to the legislation two exceptions,
commonly now referred to as the
sharpe
exceptions, to bring the
legislation into constitutional bounds.
one of those categories involved the private recording of lawful
sexual activity held only for personal use.  this category is not involved in this
case.
the other category, that the accused does rely on in this case, is
purely self-created, privately held expressive material.
the court noted this exception as including only written material
or visual representations confined to a single person in its creation,
possession, and intended audience. the example they gave was a teenager’s
diary.
the
concern noted by the court, was that failing to carve out this narrow exception
would result in the banning of
“
our own private
musings
” and “
thus falls perilously close to criminalizing the mere
articulation of thought
”.
courts have interpreted the necessity that the material be created
by a single person narrowly to avoid making a broad exception for people to
possess child pornography for personal use merely by modifying existing
creations and claiming they have solely created a new written or visual
representation.  this is clearly not what the supreme court intended, and it
obviously would create a reasoned risk of harm to children by permitting people
to lawfully make and utilize child pornography in a manner that would clearly
reinforce cognitive distortions about the sexual integrity of children.
for example,
in
r. v. t.w.
,
the accused did not insulate
himself from criminal liability when he created a journal of his sexualized
writings for his own personal use but included pre-existing photos of children
from the internet.  the court determined that using the pre-existing images in
his work meant he was not solely responsible for the creation.
additionally, the accused in
r. v. houde
, was also found not
to be solely responsible for the creation of their own drawings of child
pornography for personal use when they traced them from pre-existing images
they obtained online.
the evidence
at the outset of the trial, the parties narrowed the issues and
made several agreements pursuant to an agreed statement of facts, which was
filed as exhibit #1 in this matter.
first, the original information charged mr. goodenough with
possession of child pornography “in the form of a model” on or about the 30
th
day of october 2023.  that information was amended on consent to remove the
words “in the form of a model” and the date of the offence was also amended on
consent to be on or about the 1
st
day of november 2023.  this matter
proceeded to trial on that information as amended.
second, the crown had filed a voluntariness application to be
heard regarding statements mr. goodenough made to police. however, that
voir
dire
was formally waived by the accused, who therefore conceded his
statements were voluntary and available to be used by the crown as they saw
fit.
the accused also agreed to the following facts:
i.
jurisdiction – the alleged offence happened in london, ontario;
ii.
date – the alleged offence occurred on november 1, 2023;
iii.
identity – the accused before me is, in fact the jeremy goodenough
named in the information, and he is also the same person who possessed the doll
on november 1, 2023;
iv.
continuity of the seized doll;
v.
the forensic identification photographs, which are exhibit #2, are
admitted to be photographs of the doll seized on november 1, 2023, and were taken
on november 7, 2023, by detective constable george demopolous;
vi.
on november 1, 2023, the accused was residing at 228 suffolk place
in london, ontario, and the master bedroom of that residence was his bedroom;
vii.
the doll found on the bed in that master bedroom belonged to the
accused, who had the requisite knowledge and control of it on november 1, 2023,
to place him in possession of it however, he denied being aware of the criminal
nature of it.
below, i will summarize the evidence
of
the witnesses in this matter.  i do not intend to rehash the
entirety of the trial but rather summarize some key aspects of the evidence
given.  i have reviewed the evidence given in this matter in its totality, and
the findings of fact i ultimately make are based on all of the evidence,
whether i specifically mention it below or not.
the parties admitted on consent the evidence of constable oliveira
for its truth.  constable oliveira’s evidence is:
i.
on wednesday, november 1, 2023, constable oliveira learned that
various police units were assisting in executing a controlled drugs and
substances act (“cdsa”) warrant at 228 suffolk place in london, ontario.
ii.
two of the subjects for that warrant were jeremy goodenough and
brian goodenough, both of whom lived at 228 suffolk place.
iii.
on november 1, 2023, constable oliveira attended a staging area at
8:31 p.m. for the search of 228 suffolk place.
iv.
constable oliveira entered 228 suffolk place to execute the
warrant and cleared the main floor and basement.
v.
thereafter, constable oliveira went to the second floor to assist
in clearing it. at 9:45 p.m., he located the accused, jeremy goodenough, hiding
in the master bedroom closet, and he was detained for a cdsa investigation.
vi.
at 9:47 p.m., oliveira was walking mr. goodenough out of the
residence when he received information that he was arrestable for cdsa
offences. he arrested him and gave him his rights to counsel and caution. he
then handed mr. goodenough over to detective poustie.
detective kenneth poustie, a police officer with the london police
service for some 20 years, testified for the crown.  a summary of his evidence
is as follows:
i.
he was involved in the warrant execution at 228 suffolk place. he
attended the area of the residence at 4:22 p.m.; however, the warrant wasn’t
executed until 9:02 p.m. as the police did a containment and callout. i
understood this involved the police ensuring they had eyes on all possible
exits and then calling out to the residents to exit. detective poustie advised
that no one exited in response to the callout.
ii.
he took custody of the accused from constable oliveira and
confirmed he was aware of why he was arrested and his rights.  he then handed
the accused over for transport.
iii.
he entered the residence at 228 suffolk around 10 p.m. and assisted
in searching the master bedroom and spare bedroom.
iv.
in the master bedroom, he seized the “child-like doll” that had been
modified to insert a sex toy into the area where the genitalia would be.  the
doll was on the bed in the master bedroom positioned towards the head of the
bed.  it was seized as it appeared to him to meet the legal definition of child
pornography. it was turned over to the exhibit officer.
v.
the spare bedroom was sparsely furnished, had no bed, and did not
look like it was occupied.
vi.
upon returning to the police station just after midnight, he
arrested the accused for possession of child pornography and explained it was
for the doll.  the accused made the following statement in response to this: “
i
put a pocket pussy in a doll and didn't think that was child porn
”.
vii.
the photos of the doll, which are exhibit #2 in this case, show
how the doll appeared when seized, including the tape and positioning of the
legs.
viii.
no clothing or accessories were found for the doll.
the accused, mr. goodenough, testified in his own defence.  below
is a summary of the evidence he gave:
i.
the doll was brought to his house by his ex-girlfriend, and at the
time she brought it over, it didn’t have a “pocket pussy” in it.
ii.
he had purchased a fleshlight from the stag shop in london,
ontario, which he described as a sex store that sold adult sex stuff.
iii.
when asked by his counsel if the fleshlight was marketed to be of
a particular model, he stated that it was a replica vagina of a porn star whom
he understood to be over eighteen.
iv.
the fleshlight was on the floor under his bed, and he stepped on the
“
sleeve
” cracking it.
v.
from that point, the device would not work the same as the sleeve
was flimsy, so he put it in the doll to “
sturdy it
”.
vi.
he made this modification probably about a year before the seizure.
vii.
the doll’s face reminded him of his grandmother, which he said
made him have to wrap the whole contraption up in a blanket leaving only the
vagina exposed when using it so he wouldn’t see the face.
viii.
because the doll’s face looked like his grandmother to him, he could
never look at it while using the doll to fulfill his sexual needs, so instead,
he watched adult pornography.
ix.
he referred to the doll as “
creepy looking
”.
x.
the legs are folded up the way they are to facilitate the wrapping.
xi.
he used the altered doll for a sexual purpose, including
masturbating himself by inserting his penis into the doll;
xii.
he agreed that before the modification, it was likely a toy that a
child would play with, although in the 1930’s.
xiii.
he agreed the doll appeared to him to be about a foot and a half
tall, and a female with short hair.
xiv.
he never had any clothing for the doll.
xv.
he stated that the doll before the court was something of his own
creation, it never left his house before it was seized, and he kept it in the little
bedroom closet.
xvi.
he stated that the little bedroom was, in fact, his bedroom, and
the bigger bedroom, which had the bed where the doll was found, was not his
bedroom but had, in fact, been his grandfather’s bedroom.
xvii.
he stated that he never left the doll out in the open except the
one time when the police came and seized it when he had left it in the master
bedroom because either he had used it a few hours earlier or he thought it was
possible he intended to use it but hadn’t yet.
xviii.
he denied that his brother brian goodenough ever lived at 228
suffolk place.
xix.
he denied the doll appeared childlike to him, stating that it had
“boobs”, and then reiterated that the face reminded him of his grandmother.
however, he did acknowledge that someone could reasonably see it as a child.
is the doll child pornography
my first task in assessing the evidence in this case is to
determine if the seized doll constitutes child pornography under canadian law.
in this case, the crown alleges that the doll meets the definition
of child pornography specifically under
s.163.1(1)
(ii), in that it is a “visual
representation”, the “dominant characteristic” of which is the depiction for a
“sexual purpose” the “sexual organ” of “a person under the age of eighteen
years”.
defence argues that the doll is not child pornography because it
does not depict the sexual organ of a person under the age of eighteen years, both
because the doll had adult features and the sexual organ it depicts is that of
a person over the age of eighteen.
is the doll a visual representation?
i agree with the many cases cited in this judgment that a doll
constitutes a visual representation of a person, albeit imaginary in this
case.  the definition of what constitutes a visual representation under the
definition of child pornography is very broad, and as has been pointed out in
previous decisions, a doll is very similar to a sculpture, and sculptures were explicitly
referenced as a visual representation
in
sharpe
.
indeed, defence counsel did not argue otherwise, and appears to
have essentially conceded this point.
is the dominant characteristic of the doll the depiction for a
sexual purpose of a sexual organ of a person?
i apply to a consideration of the dominant characteristic of this
doll a qualitative assessment based on what an objective and reasonable person
would perceive.
in considering whether the depiction is for a sexual purpose, i
again consider what an objective and reasonable person would determine from
viewing the doll.
ultimately, i am left with no doubt whatsoever that an objective
and reasonable person would perceive the dominant characteristic of this doll
to be the depiction of a sexual organ for a sexual purpose.
while this view is consistent with the stated intent of its
creator, the accused, his view is not determinative of this question.
the size of the doll, the placement of the replica vulva near the anatomically
correct location, and the skewing of the doll’s legs, which only further draws
the eye to the vulva and permits better visibility and access, all support this
conclusion.  the replica vulva is clearly the dominant characteristic of the
doll.
further, an objective and reasonable person viewing this doll
would necessarily conclude that the doll was intended to cause sexual
stimulation to at least some viewers.  indeed, the only rational, reasonable
conclusion one can draw from looking at this doll is that it was intended to be
a “sex doll” or a representation of a person, in this case, a female, with
which to simulate sexual intercourse.
i also conclude that the vulva is unquestionably a sexual organ
based on the case law, as that term is used in s.163.1(1).  indeed, it is part
of one of the primary sexual organs, the genitalia.
is the depiction the sexual organ of a person under the age of eighteen
years?
the defence argues both that the doll overall appears to depict a
person over the age of eighteen and, further, that even if the doll itself
depicts a person under the age of eighteen, the depicted vulva is of a person
over the age of eighteen. thus, it would still not meet the definition.
in my view, these issues cannot be considered apart.  in
determining whether the doll depicts for a sexual purpose the sexual organ of a
person under the age of eighteen, the entire doll must be looked at and
considered as a whole.  once again, the issue is whether a reasonable person
would perceive the visual representation as depicting for a sexual purpose the
sexual organ of a person under the age of eighteen.  at this stage, the views
of the accused are not relevant.
indeed, if i agree with the defence counsel that the vulva, in
isolation, appears to be that of an adult, that alone will not mean that the
doll couldn’t meet the statutory definition of child pornography.  i am aware
of cases in this province where individuals were found to have made child pornography
by superimposing the faces of young children onto the nude bodies of adults.
the mere fact that the sexual organ may be an adult one does not serve to
insulate an overall visual representation that otherwise depicts a person under
the age of eighteen from being found to be child pornography.  indeed, counsel
provided me with no case that said so.
further, this makes complete sense when we return to first
principles and consider two of the significant evils of child pornography:
i.
it promotes cognitive distortions about children and sex; and
ii.
it fuels fantasies that incite offenders to offend.
placing adult sexual organs on what is otherwise an obvious child could
only serve to reinforce the cognitive distortion that children have the adult
ability and maturity to engage in sexual behaviour and fuel the fantasies of
those who wish to have sex with children.
however, i disagree in any event that the vulva itself is of all
that much assistance in determining age.  again, the issue is what a reasonable
and objective person would perceive based on viewing the doll.  the knowledge
and views of the accused in this determination are again irrelevant.
here, the representation of the vulva does little to assist the
reasonable person in determining the depicted age in isolation.  there is
nothing anatomically that suggests this depicts the vulva of a person over the
age of eighteen as opposed to under the age of eighteen.  indeed, the most
notable thing is the lack of pubic hair, which would tend to suggest a younger
age, although adults can and do remove pubic hair.  further, as we are dealing
with a visual representation of an imaginary person instead of a real person,
it is even harder to determine this in isolation.
looking at the doll as a whole, defence argued that a number of
features would cause one to conclude it is a person over the age of eighteen.  they
pointed to broad shoulders, the narrowing of the waist, the hairstyle and
breasts.
looking at the doll and applying the perception of a reasonable
and objective person, i cannot agree with the defence.  i don’t see the
shoulders as “
broad
”, and even if they were, i don’t know how that would
assist me in determining the age of the person.  some children have broader
shoulders, and some adults do not.
further, while i agree that the waist area is narrower than the
areas directly above or below it, i do not view that feature as suggestive of an
age over eighteen, even when looking at the doll as a whole.
the hairstyle objectively appears child-like, although some adults
may cut and style their hair in this manner.
finally, what the defence says are breasts, in my view, objectively
only appears to be the development of breasts, as consistent with a pre-pubescent
child.  the slightly mounded areas void of any areola development or a nipple is
not reasonably seen as a post-pubescent breast.
when i look at the doll, applying the perception of a reasonable
and objective person, i conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the doll
depicts for a sexual purpose the sexual organ of a person less than eighteen
years of age.  i base this conclusion on the size of the doll, the child-like
face and hairstyle, the lack of representation of pubic or other post-pubescent
hair and the presence of a representation of pre-pubescent breast development.
indeed, the only reasonable and rational conclusion i can draw from viewing the
doll is that it is meant to represent a pre-pubescent child.
in conclusion, i find beyond a reasonable doubt that the doll
depicted in exhibit #2 constitutes child pornography under
s.163.1(1)
(ii) of
the
criminal code
. it is a visual representation, the dominant
characteristic of which is the depiction, for a sexual purpose, of a sexual
organ of a person under the age of eighteen years.
was the accused in possession of the doll on november 1, 2023?
possession of the doll by the accused on november 1, 2023, was an admitted
fact in this case.  as such, i accept as fact beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused was in possession of the doll on november 1, 2023.
did the accused know or was he wilfully blind as to the nature of
the doll?
as discussed above, the accused does not need to understand that
the doll constitutes child pornography at law to have the
mens rea
for
this offence.  an error on his part as to the illegality of the pornography is
a mistake of law for which no defence lies in canadian law.
he does, however, need to subjectively know or be wilfully blind
to the nature of the pornography that could make it child pornography.  another
way to put this is whether the accused knew or was wilfully blind to the
characteristics of the doll that could make it child pornography.
i remind myself here that the accused has no onus in this trial.
he need not prove that he did not know the above.  indeed, the crown must prove
he did beyond a reasonable doubt.
however, given that the accused testified and denied knowing the
character of the doll that could make it child pornography, most notably that
it depicts a person under the age of eighteen, this is a convenient place to conduct
a
w.(d.)
analysis
in this case.  this will, of necessity, require that i
make findings of credibility and reliability of evidence using the rules i
noted earlier in this decision.
first, did i believe the accused when he stated that, in his mind,
the doll depicts a person over the age of eighteen?  if so, then he is entitled
to an acquittal.
i did not believe the accused’s evidence on this point.  indeed, i
had many issues with the testimony of the accused that ultimately resulted in
me rejecting his evidence on this issue altogether.
first, the accused’s evidence was frequently nonsensical.  indeed,
his evidence of how he broke his fleshlight in the first place involved him
telling me he stepped on it while it was under the bed.  it is unclear to me
how one steps on an object that is under a bed.
assuming for the sake of argument that the fleshlight broke as he
said it did, the testimony on how it came to be in the doll, as a method to
repair the sleeve, defied credulity.
the fleshlight, as i understood it, consists of the depicted
vulva, as seen in exhibit #2, that is attached to a cylindric shaft or sleeve.
the item, not surprisingly given the name, would resemble the form of a typical
flashlight.
as testified to, the sleeve is this cylindric shaft area that
serves as a handle.  it is this part the accused said was broken and made it
too flimsy to use as intended.
the idea that someone looked at this doll and concluded that this
was the answer to this problem is, with respect, significantly far-fetched.  of
all the many solutions i can perceive to reinforce the sleeve that one could
come up with, including using the tape that was used all over the doll to allow
for the insertion of the fleshlight into it; putting the fleshlight into the
doll’s groin area, in my view, constitutes a chasmic leap of logic.
added to the nonsensical use of this doll as just a raw material
with which to repair the fleshlight, i also consider the fact that the accused
admitted the whole purpose of this item was to pleasure himself sexually and
that he found the doll “creepy” and that its face reminded him of his
grandmother.  in fact, so off-putting was this doll to him that he says its use
required him to wrap the whole thing up in a blanket so only the sexual organ
was visible.
it is simply inconceivable to me that the accused would choose to
repair his sex toy by adding to it an item that he finds “creepy” and that has
a face that looks like his grandmother, something that he did not find sexually
pleasurable.  i couldn’t imagine something less associated with sexual pleasure
than the way the accused described how he viewed this doll.  it simply was not
believable that he would choose it to fix his sex toy.
i also go back to my earlier findings about the doll and state
that it is evident to me that in using the doll, the accused intended to build
a sex doll.  that is, the doll was selected not because of its obviousness as a
rigid material in which to bolster the strength of the fleshlight sleeve but
because the accused wished to create a doll that he could simulate sexual
intercourse.  by his own admission he used the doll by inserting his penis into
the doll, which i infer was done by inserting his penis into the fleshlight.
if the doll were just repair material, there would have been no
need for the accused to take steps to insert the fleshlight into the area that
is essentially the anatomically correct placement for the sexual organ.  this
placement was not coincidental, i find on all the evidence that it was an
intentional choice to try and maximize anatomical correctness.
indeed, looking at the doll, and the splaying of the legs, i concluded,
that the legs were placed that way because it facilitates access for the
accused’s penis into the fleshlight, while it occupies a position close to
where the sexual organ would be in a real person.  this would then allow him to
best simulate sexual intercourse with a real person.  i reject his explanation
that the legs were placed that way because it assisted in wrapping the doll in
a blanket; for all the reasons i give for rejecting his evidence, i don’t
believe him.
i had other issues with the accused’s evidence.  one of the agreed
facts in this case was that the master bedroom where the doll was found was, in
fact, the accused’s bedroom.  the accused, however, in his evidence, denied
this and told me the other bedroom, the one the police described as sparsely
furnished and seemingly unoccupied, was his bedroom.  he told me the bedroom
where the doll was his grandfather’s, but at the time of the seizure, his
grandfather was in hospital.
i am required to accept agreed facts as established facts.  the
accused’s evidence conflicts with that fact, and given that this is not an
issue, i think the accused could be mistaken i can only conclude he lied about
this.
considering the accused’s evidence on its face, in any event, makes
his version even more problematic.  on his evidence, then, he was taking his
sex doll, whose face reminded him of his grandmother, which to him was clearly
not a good thing, from his bedroom into his grandfather’s bedroom so that he
could use it there.  i find this suggestion internally inconsistent with his
position that he was so disturbed by the resemblance of the doll to his
grandmother that he couldn’t even look at it.
the accused also tried to state he never left the doll out of the
closet he kept it in but then told me that coincidentally, on the day of the
seizure, he may have removed the doll from the closet and left it on the bed in
the open for potentially hours, explaining why it was found there and not the
closet.  i find this coincidence highly unlikely, and it is far more likely
that the doll was frequently on the bed where it would be used by the accused.
i also note that the accused agreed to the evidence of constable
oliveira going in for its truth, which included evidence that both he and brian
goodenough lived at the residence at 228 suffolk.  he did not cross-examine
constable oliveira on this issue.  however, in his evidence he testified that
brian goodenough never lived at 228 suffolk.
finally, the accused’s position that the doll looked like an adult
was premised on only two factors he could articulate.  one was that the face
reminded him of his grandmother, and for reasons already given in this judgment,
i reject that proposition.  it is simply not believable that he would build his
sex toy with a face that reminded him of his grandmother.  another was he said
it had “boobs”.  for reasons already given, i reject that anyone, including the
accused, would see the modest mounded areas of this doll’s chest as adult
breasts.
ultimately, i have already found that an objective and reasonable
person would have no problem concluding that this doll depicted a person under
the age of eighteen.  in my view, this is not a close call.  the doll so
obviously depicts a child that i conclude, on all of the evidence, that the
accused intentionally tried to mislead me about his view.
i am unable to rely on his evidence that the fleshlight he bought was
a replica of an adult porn star, although i note that would make no difference
to my conclusion anyway.
i do not believe the accused, and for the same reasons i have
stated, his evidence does not cause me reasonable doubt.
looking at all the evidence i accept, i find that the accused
built this doll from a pre-existing doll, which he modified by inserting his
fleshlight into the position, which would allow him to simulate sex with the
doll in an essentially anatomically correct position.  i find the legs were
positioned to allow access for the accused’s penis into the fleshlight in a
manner that assisted in simulating sexual intercourse.  he clearly had a sexual
purpose behind making this doll.
further, i conclude that he knew that this doll obviously depicted
a person under the age of eighteen, and indeed, i find on all the evidence that
the only rational conclusion i can reach on this evidence is that this doll was
constructed in this manner to simulate having sex with a child.  to put it
another way, the point was to create a doll that resembled a child that had, as
one of its dominant characteristics, a sexual organ that could be used to simulate
sexual intercourse.
as such, i
have no difficulty finding beyond a reasonable doubt on the evidence i have
accepted that the accused knew the nature or characte
r
of the doll that made it child pornography, even if he didn’t
understand that the doll met the legal definition of child pornography.
having found that the doll is child pornography, that the accused possessed
it on the date of the offence and that he had the requisite
mens rea,
a
finding of guilt would follow unless i agree with the accused that he is
entitled to be found not guilty because of the
sharpe
exception that
allows a person to possess a visual representation confined to a single person
in its creation, possession and intended audience.
does the
sharpe
exception apply to the doll?
in this case the
sharpe
exception does not apply because
the doll is not confined to a single person in its creation.  the doll is
simply an amalgamation of two existing visual representations created by other
people, not the accused.
there is good reason to apply the
sharpe
exception strictly
and confine it.  indeed, correctly interpreted, it should apply only to
two-dimensional works, such as an accused’s writings or drawings made entirely
by their hand.
failure
to apply
sharpe
strictly would almost certainly
cause canada to fail in its ability to protect children from harmful sexualization
here at home and also cause us as a country to fail to adhere to our
international obligation to protect children from such harm as a signatory to
the convention on the rights of the child and the convention on the rights of
the child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography.
indeed, if the
sharpe
exception applied whenever anyone
made child pornography out of existing visual representations, it would
constitute a broad and easily abused exception that would clearly create a
reasoned risk of harm to children.  to possess a potentially limitless amount
of personal use child pornography, all a user would have to do is make some
modification to existing child pornography and then claim it as their own
“expression”.  prior case law shows this is not permitted and i concur.
the constitutional concern
in
sharpe
was that a law that
didn’t allow a person to write out or draw their own thoughts under their own
hand for their own private personal use was far too close to criminalizing the
thoughts themselves.  no such concern exists if a person is prevented from using
existing visual representations or writings to make child pornography, even if
it is for their private personal use.
in striking a balance between reducing the reasoned risk of harm
to children, and freedom of expression, allowing people to record their
thoughts under their own hand for their own use does little to increase the
risk beyond the thought itself.
using pre-existing objects to create a child sex doll to simulate
having sex with a child is obviously creating a significant reasoned risk of
harming children beyond just the concept of the doll in one’s mind.
the need for the visual representation to be
solely
created
by a private user under their own hand is a critical requirement for the
exception to apply.  indeed, we are now living in a world where a person could
have artificial intelligence create pictures of incredibly realistic child
pornography.
the mere fact someone makes a visual representation of child
pornography for their private personal use does not itself meet the
sharpe
exception.
i would also point out that i had real difficulties with the
accused’s evidence about who lived at the residence with him and where the doll
was usually kept. i also don’t find the evidence consistent with the doll being
kept exclusively private.
conclusion
having found beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused knowingly
possessed child pornography and that the
sharpe
exception does not
apply, a finding of guilt will be made on the sole count of possession of child
pornography.
released:  february 11, 2025
signed: justice
j. miller
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r.
320
at para.
36
;
r. v. sanichar
,
2012 onca 117
at para.
46
r. v. w.(d.)
,
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
, 1 scr 742
r. v. a.s.
,
2002 canlii 44934 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 1950
r. v. c.c.
,
2018 onsc 1262
,
at paras.
61-62
r. v. kruk
,
2024 scc 7 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no. 7
joyal et al
,
prosecuting
and defending offences against children, 2nd edition
(
2023), ch. 7
, p. 239.
r v sharpe
,
2001 scc 2
see
r. v. petts,
o.j. no. 6056
;
r. v.
morellato
(october 6, 2023), bradford 22-81301038 (ocj);
r. v. naess
,
2022 onsc 6490
;
yan v. r.
,
q.j. no. 2532
; r
. v. gagnon
,
q.j. no. 3734
;
director of criminal and penal prosecutions v renaud
,
2013 qccs 7169
;
r v harrison
,
nj no 406
r. v. sharpe
,
supra,
at para.
50
ibid
ibid
joyal et al
,
supra
,
ch. 7, p. 234
r. v. sharpe
, supra,
at para.
43
ibid,
at para.
38.
joyal et al
,
supra
, ch.
7, p. 240
r. v. lights
,
2020 onca 128 (canlii)
, 149 o.r. (3d) 273
at para.
69
r. v. sharpe
, supra
, at para.
34
ibid,
at para. 100
ibid
, at para. 115
ibid
, at para. 108
r. v. t.w.,
2014 onsc 4532 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 3667
r. v. houde,
2021 qcca 1252
see for instance:
r. v. c.g.,
o.j. no. 7007 at
para. 34
joyal et al., supra,
ch. 7, p. 252