ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. jones
, 2025 oncj 404
date: july
29, 2025
court
file no.:  halton info # 998 23 12101191
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
stephen jones
before
justice jennifer campitelli
heard
on march 3
rd
, april 2
nd
, may 8
th
, june 16
th
,
and june 19
th
, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on july 29, 2025
m. chant................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
j. clark................................................................. counsel
for the accused stephen jones
campitelli j.:
following a trial, stephen jones was found
guilty of the following two counts, that he:
(1)
on or about the 9
th
day of april in
the year 2023 at the town of milton in the said region, did commit a sexual
assault on a.d. contrary to
section 271
of the
criminal code of canada
;
and further that
(2)
on or about the 9
th
day of april in
the year 2023 at the town of milton in the said region, being in a position of
trust or authority towards a.d., a young person, did for a sexual purpose touch
directly the body of a.d. a young person with a part of his body to wit; his
mouth, contrary to
section 153(1)
(a) of the
criminal code of canada
.
a detailed summary of the facts was included in
my written reasons for judgment released on october 29, 2024.  therefore, only
summary reference is required at this time. it was established at trial beyond
a reasonable doubt that mr. jones initiated sexual contact with a.d. on
april 9, 2023 without her consent.  i found mr. jones touched a.d’s breasts and
nipples under her clothing, which included rubbing and squeezing and that he also
placed his mouth on both of a.d’s breasts and her nipples. i further found that
mr. jones kissed a.d. on the mouth and attempted to use his tongue. i concluded
that a.d. did not want the sexual contact between herself and mr. jones to
happen, she did not consent to it.  finally, i found that mr. jones was in a
position of trust relative to a.d. when he sexually assaulted her on april 9,
2023.
background of the offender
mr. jones chose to address me with his counsel
assisting him by asking him questions to focus his submissions.  he expressed
remorse for the harm he had caused and revealed that he feels very ashamed of
his actions.  he spoke of his efforts to rebuild his relationship with his
daughters, and candidly admitted that he felt he was a “shell” of the man he
used to be.  mr. jones expressed that his work with dr. albert de goias has
been very helpful, and he continues to engage in counselling and support for
his mental health related challenges.  mr. jones apologized to the victim in
this matter a.d. and indicated that he hoped his actions did not impact the
rest of her life in any significant way.
additionally, a presentence report was ordered
to gain further insight into mr. jones’ background and individual personal
circumstances.  the presentence report (psr) provided some insight into mr. jones’
upbringing.  mr. jones was adopted by his biological brother, and was raised
with his younger indigenous sister, who was also adopted into the family.  he
reports being exposed to racial discrimination during his childhood.  mr. jones
does not report any substance use issues by his parents or any incidents of
physical or verbal abuse.  his family had limited means, and they relied on
government financial assistance at times.  mr. jones reports having a
“tumultuous” relationship with his brother, who raised him.  however, he always
maintained a close relationship with his sister, and they continue to have
regular contact.
mr. jones met his former partner when they were
working at the same company, and they were married in 2000.  although they are
currently separated, ms. larkin is supportive of mr. jones and describes him as
a wonderful father.  she reports that the pair created a loving and supportive home
that was always open to welcoming and assisting others.  mr. jones maintains
contact with his daughters, assisting them with their academics. he hopes to
rebuild his relationship with them and regain their trust.
mr. jones personally and emotionally addressed
me.  he expressed the extreme remorse he feels because of his assaultive
behaviour relative to a.d., which he now admits.  he deeply regrets the harm he
has caused to a.d. as well as his family and has found his work through therapy
both meaningful and enlightening.  he now fully appreciates his wrongdoing and
is willing to accept the consequences.
impact on the victim
a.d. provided a victim impact statement
outlining the emotional, physical, and financial hardship she has endured as a
result of being victimized by mr. jones.  a.d. speaks of how being assaulted
sexually has altered her perspectives on sex and boundaries forever.  a.d.
recounts the difficulties she has experienced in her personal relationships
with her family and an intimate partner.  she reveals she failed a high school course
and dropped out of her first year at university because of the pain and mental
disconnection she felt.  a.d. speaks of struggling with focus and motivation
and having to engage in extensive therapy.
a.d. recounts feelings of being manipulated by
mr. jones, feeling that she was in his complete control.  she describes mr.
jones as playing a “fatherly” role in her life and abusing her trust.  she
speaks of feeling guilty for speaking up, as she knew it would be hurtful to
both mr. jones and his family.
finally, a.d. recalls how impactful testifying
at trial was.  she describes fantasizing about getting in a car accident, so
she would not have to re-live all the pain again.  a.d. was not able to attend school
and became depressed.  a.d. describes feelings of anxiety, exhaustion and being
disgusted with herself.
grounding legal principles:
the order of proceeding: notice of
constitutional question with respect to
s. 153(1)
(a) of the
criminal code of
canada
mr. jones has brought an application,
challenging the constitutional validity of the mandatory minimum sentence
attached to
s. 153(1)
(a) of the
criminal code of canada
.
the crown takes the position that i should first
determine what the appropriate disposition is in mr. jones’ individual
circumstances, and with a view to the entire evidentiary record, which has been
placed before me.  if the disposition i reach is greater than 90 days imprisonment,
which is the mandatory minimum sentence attached to the s. 153 count in these
circumstances, then the crown argues any analysis with respect to the
constitutional validity of the applicable provision, in mr. jones’ individual
circumstances is academic.  simply put, mr. jones’ constitutional argument
would be ‘moot’ in those circumstances, and i should not consider it.  the
ontario court of appeal refused to interfere with the trial judge’s decision to
employ this procedure in
r .v. laverne,
2023 onca 592
.  moreover, a
similar procedure was followed in
r .v. riossi
,
2023 onsc 3812
, where
justice di luca found it would be “academic” on the facts of the case before
him.
the defence was not able to present any binding
authority, which would suggest i ought to conduct my analysis otherwise.
sexual assault cases where children are
victimized
in
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9 (canlii)
, 1 s.c.r. 424, the
supreme court of canada sent a strong message that sexual offences against
children are violent crimes, that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerability
and cause profound harm to children, families and communities:
r. v. friesen
at para.
5
.
denunciation and deterrence are the primary
objectives when sentencing for sexual offences against children.  carceral
sentences will ordinarily follow, and conditional sentences will only rarely be
appropriate.  their availability must be limited to exceptional circumstances
that render incarceration inappropriate:
r .v. b.s.,
o.j. no. 28
at para. 49
citing
r .v.
friesen
,
at paras.
114-116
and
r .v. m.m.,
2022
onca 441
at paras.
15-16
.
in
r. v. l.f.w.,
2000 scc 6 (canlii)
, 1 s.c.r. 132 at
paragraph
31
, the supreme court of canda adopted the following language:
…i
do start from the premise that sexual assault of a child is a crime that is
abhorrent to canadian society and society’s condemnation of those who commit
such offences must be communicated in the clearest of terms.  as to moral
blameworthiness, the use of a vulnerable child for the sexual gratification of
an adult cannot be viewed as anything but a crime demonstrating the worst of
intentions.  the trial judge obviously concluded that “house arrest” with
certain liberties would be sufficient to communicate society’s condemnation of
the offender’s conduct in the case.  with the greatest of respect for the
opinion of the trial judge, i do not accept that the objectives of sentencing
can be met in this case by a conditional sentence…
however, it must also be remembered that cases
have found that a conditional sentence can provide both deterrence and
denunciation and that the supreme court of canada also stated that a conditional
sentence order can meet these goals in
r .v. proulx
1 s.c.r. 61
.
the kienapple argument
if there is a finding of guilt on one count, and
the same or substantially the same elements make up the offence charged in a
second count, the situation invites the rule against multiple convictions.  parliament’s
power to constitute two separate offences out of the same matter is not in
question.  however, unless there is a clear indication that multiple
prosecutions and multiple convictions are envisaged, than one of the
convictions should be quashed:
r .v. kienapple
, 1. s.c.r. 729.
the principle in
r. v. kienapple
does not
prohibit a multiplicity of convictions, each in respect of a different factual
incident.  there is degree of factual identity required between the charges,
which will usually be answered by determining whether the same act of the
accused grounds each of the charges:
r. v. prince,
1986 canlii 40 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 480
at para.
17 and 20
.
once it has been established that there is a
sufficient factual nexus between the charges, it remains to determine whether there
is an adequate relationship between the offences themselves:
r. v. prince
,
at
paragraph
22
.
in applying the above criteria, it is important
not to carry logic so far as to frustrate the intent of parliament or as to
lose sight of
the overarching question whether the same
cause, matter or delict underlies both charges
:
r. v. prince
,
at
paragraph
39
.
the crown argues that on this particular record,
in order for mr. jones to be found guilty of the
s. 153(1)
(a) count, i was
required to engage in a separate legal analysis guided by the factors outlined
in the ontario court of appeal’s decision in
r .v.
aird
,
2013 onca 447 (canlii)
,
o.j. no. 3027
.
therefore, the crown takes the position
that the principles outlined in
r. v. kienapple
are not applicable.
notwithstanding the crown concedes a factual nexus exists between the charges,
it argues that there is an inadequate relationship between the counts.
essentially, the crown submits that the same or substantially the same elements
do not make up the offences charged with respect to both counts.
in contrast, the defence argues strongly the
sexual assault is the same cause, matter, or delict, which underlies both
charges.  as such, the defence takes the position the principles outlined in
r.
v. kienapple
are applicable, and one charge must be conditionally stayed.
position of the parties with respect
to disposition
crown
the crown takes the position that the
appropriate sentence is a period of twelve to eighteen months custody, followed
by a two-year period of probation with terms to address counselling and contact
with the victim a.d.  the crown also requests a no contact order relative to
the victim when mr. jones is in custody, a 110 order for five years, a dna
order, and the mandatory soira order for ten years. the crown argues, should i
be persuaded by its argument relative to
r. v. kienapple,
that a
concurrent sentence is appropriate given that the
offences are so closely linked to each other as to constitute a single
criminal adventure.
should i deem the principles in
r.
v. kienapple
are applicable, the crown asks me to conditionally stay the
s.
271
count, taking the position it is the less serious of the two counts on this
record.  notwithstanding, given the aggravating features the crown stresses
relative to the
s. 153(1)
(a) count, its position on the ultimate disposition
remains unchanged.
the crown grounds its position in the principles
of general and specific deterrence and denunciation.  the crown stresses the
following factors in particular, which it argues are aggravating in mr. jones’
individual circumstances:
(a)
a.d. was only seventeen years old at the time of
the offence.  therefore, s.
718.2(a)(ii.1)
is
applicable;
(b)
i also found that mr. jones was in a position of
trust relative to a.d., making
s. 718.2(a)(iii.3)
applicable
as well.  the crown stresses to that end, the nature of the ongoing relationship
between mr. jones and a.d., where he played the role of ‘father figure’ in her
life, gaining her trust prior to victimizing her;
(c)
the crown also highlights the victim impact
statement.  reminding me of the significant immediate and long-term harm
sustained by a.d.  harm, which she personally describes as life-altering;
(d)
finally, the crown relies on
s. 718.01
of the
criminal
code
, which states that when a court imposes a sentence for an offence that
involves the abuse of a person under the age of eighteen years, it shall give
primary consideration to the objective of denunciation and deterrence of such
conduct.  this is consistent with the binding authority from appellate courts:
r.
v. d.d.
,
2002 canlii 44915 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 1061,
r. v. w.l.f.
2000 scc 6 (canlii)
, 1 s.c.r. 132.
it is the crown’s position that the sentence
must be served in an institution to address deterrence and denunciation on
these facts, and that a conditional sentence would not appropriately address
the principles of sentencing as outlined in
section 718
of the
criminal code
of canada
.
defence
on behalf of mr. jones, mr. clark argues a
conditional sentence is appropriate on these facts and reminds me that i am
able to impose a conditional sentence, even when there are aggravating
circumstances.  he stresses the mitigating factors present in mr. jones’ individual
case.  the lack of a criminal record, the extensive therapy he has engaged in
since the time of the offence, his positive pro-social relationships, and the
enormous support he enjoys in the community.  mr. clark also emphasizes mr.
jones’ age; the impact incarceration would have on his familial relationships
and the therapeutic treatment he is currently receiving.  mr. clark characterizes
mr. jones’ behaviour relative to a.d. as out of character, and stresses that
mr. jones does not pose a risk to the community.
therefore, mr. clark asks me to impose a
conditional sentence, if one is available, followed by a probation order to
address any safety concerns a.d. might have as well as counselling.  mr. clark
does not oppose any of the ancillary orders sought by the crown.
mr. clark referenced several authorities in his
submissions, where conditional sentences were imposed with respect to similar
offences; however, i note much of the caselaw provided was distinguishable.
the sentences referenced were imposed by jurists in the midst of the covid-19 pandemic,
in the context of jointly proposed submissions, or with a view to individuals
who possessed exceptional personal circumstances.
sentencing principles
the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and
to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law
and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society by imposing just
sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to
denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that
is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b)
to
deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c)
to
separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to
assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to
provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to
promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm
done to victims or to the community:
s. 718
of the
criminal code of canada
.
a sentence must be “proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender”:
criminal code
of
canada,
s. 718.1. the degree of responsibility of the offender requires a
consideration of the offender’s moral blameworthiness.  assessing that moral
blameworthiness must be done through the perspective of the offender’s life
experiences and personal characteristics:
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
at
para.
88
.  this process of individualization is “central to the proportionality
assessment”:
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
at para.
12
.
ultimately, the sentence imposed must reflect
the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility and the
unique circumstances of the case:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58
.
i am further guided by the supreme court of
canada’s decision in
r. v. nasogaluak,
where the court explained the
dual role of restraint and censure that proportionality plays in sentencing
offenders:
for one, it
requires that a sentence not
exceed
what is just and
appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of
the offence. in this sense, the principle serves a limiting or restraining
function. however, the rights-based, protective angle of proportionality is
counter-balanced by its alignment with the "just deserts" philosophy
of sentencing, which seeks to ensure that offenders are held responsible for
their actions and that the sentence properly reflects and condemns their role
in the offence and the harm they caused...whatever the rationale for
proportionality, however, the degree of censure required to express society's
condemnation of the offence is always limited by the principle that an
offender's sentence must be equivalent to his or her moral culpability, and not
greater than it. the two perspectives on proportionality thus converge in a
sentence that both speaks out against the offence and punishes the offender no
more than is necessary:
r. v. nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6 (canlii)
,
1 s.c.r. 206
at
paragraph
42
.
aggravating and mitigating factors
section 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code of canada
requires
that a sentence be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating
or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender.  i find
the following aggravating factors are present in this case:
(1)
the offences involve a child under the age of 18, which is statutorily
aggravating:
criminal code of canada
s. 718.2(a)(ii.1);
(2)
additionally, in perpetrating the sexual assault on a.d.,
mr. jones abused a position of trust.  not only was mr. jones a.d.’s softball
coach, she viewed him as a “father figure”:
criminal code of canada
s.
s. 718.2
(a)(iii.3); and
(3)
finally, the impact of the sexual assault a.d. experienced at the hands
of mr. jones was profound and life-altering.  being victimized in this way significantly
impacted her physical and emotional well-being and has interfered with her
ability to pursue post-secondary education.
with a view to mitigating factors, i find the following
mitigating factors are present:
(1)
mr. jones does not have a criminal record;
(2)
mr. jones enjoys many positive relationships within the community and
comes before me with enormous support.  most significantly, he has a positive
relationship with his children, and his former spouse;
(3)
mr. jones has engaged in extensive therapy to address the underlying
issues, which resulted in him committing these offences relative to a.d.
moreover, i find the offences mr. jones committed on april 9, 2023, can
properly be characterized as out of character; and
(4)
finally, mr. jones has now acknowledged his guilt and expressed his
remorse for his actions.  however, i note that his admission to this end comes
after trial.  therefore, i must consider that his admission did not save a.d.
from testifying in this matter.  her victim impact statement serves to
highlight how difficult providing her testimony was for her, and the impact she
sustained as a result.
analysis/conclusion:
first, i must turn my mind to the applicability of the principles
as outlined in
r. v. kienapple.
both parties agree that a sufficient
factual nexus exists between the counts to engage the analysis.  therefore, i
will focus my analysis on whether there is an adequate
relationship between the counts such that the same or substantially the same
elements make up the offences charged.  certainly, i had to undergo an
independent legal analysis with a view to my finding pursuant to
s. 153(1)
(a) of
the
criminal code of canada
.
notwithstanding i had concluded beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. jones had sexually assaulted a.d. at the relevant
time, i then had to consider the factors outlined in
r .v.
aird
,
2013 onca 447 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 3027 to determine if  a
relationship of trust existed between mr. jones and a.d. at the time of the
assault.  therefore, i find the crown’s argument, that additional elements were
required to prove the
s. 153(1)
(a) offence persuasive.  however, i must not lose
sight of the overarching question, whether the same cause, matter or delict
underlies both charges?  it is here that i find the crown’s argument fails.  i
found mr. jones guilty of sexually assaulting a.d. on april 9, 2023.  the
sexual assault he perpetrated relative to a.d. is the same cause, matter or
delict that underlies both charges.  as such, the
s. 271
count will be
conditionally stayed pursuant to the principles outlined in
r. v. kienapple
,
and mr. jones will be sentenced solely on the
s. 153(1)
(a) count.
in the result, i find mr. jones’ crimes reflect a high degree of
moral culpability.  mr. jones established himself as a “father figure” in a.d.’s
life.  he coached her, helped her with her homework, and fostered a
relationship of trust between them.  a trust he would then exploit when he
assaulted a.d. sexually on april 9, 2023.  a.d. was vulnerable, just seventeen
years old at the time of the assault.  the impact she has experienced as a
result of being victimized in this way has been profound and i fully accept
that it will be life-altering.  to be very clear, a.d.’s life is forever
changed because of the sexual assault perpetrated by mr. jones, who was someone
she looked up to and trusted.  i appreciate mr. jones has accepted
responsibility for his conduct, expressed remorse and enjoys tremendous support
in the community.  i also accept his actions relative to a.d. are out of
character.  however, this is not atypical with a view to offences of this
nature.
i conclude the principles of denunciation and general and
specific deterrence are the primary sentencing principles on this record, which
is where i have placed significant weight.  i am guided by
s. 718.01
of the
criminal
code of canada
, and the binding appellate caselaw.  i find that a 12-month
period of custody is the appropriate disposition with respect to the
s.
153(1)
(a) count considering the significant aggravating factors present on this
record.  this period of custody will be followed by a two-year period of
probation to address safety concerns relative to the victim a.d. and
counselling.
given the period of custody imposed is under two years or 24
months, i have turned my mind to whether a conditional sentence is
appropriate.  in the balance, i have determined that given mr. jones’ moral
culpability is particularly high, and the crimes have had a significant impact
on the victim, a conditional sentence is simply not a proportionate penalty
that adequately reflects the sentencing principles of denunciation and general
and specific deterrence:
r. v. christink
2012 onca 141
at para.
5
.  on
my review, such a sentence would simply not be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing contained in
sections 718
-
718.2
of the
criminal
code of canada
.  a conditional sentence would not reflect the gravity of
the offence committed, the harm caused to a.d., who was only seventeen at the
time of this offence, and mr. jones’ significant moral culpability. i have reminded myself that when imposing a sentence for sexual
offences involving a child, carceral sentences will ordinarily follow, and
conditional sentences will only rarely be appropriate.  their availability must
be limited to exceptional circumstances that render incarceration
inappropriate:
r .v. b.s.,
o.j. no. 28 at para. 49
citing
r
.v.
friesen
,
at paras.
114-116
and
r .v. m.m.
,
2022 onca 441
at
paras.
15-16
.  after very careful consideration, i do not find that mr. jones’
individual circumstances represent exceptional circumstances, which render
incarceration inappropriate.
finally, i have concluded the appropriate disposition in mr.
jones’ individual personal circumstances exceeds the mandatory minimum sentence
attached to
s. 153(1)
(a) of the
criminal code of canada
.  therefore, considering
the merits of the challenge to its constitutional validity would be purely
academic on this record.  consequently, i will not engage in this analysis:
r .v. laverne,
2023 onca 592
; r .v.
riossi
,
2023 onsc 3812
.
the s. 271 count is conditionally stayed, and mr. jones is
sentenced to a 12-month period of incarceration with respect to the
s.
153(1)
(a) count.  this period of custody will be followed by a two-year period
of probation.  in addition to the mandatory statutory terms, mr. jones is not
to have any contact either directly or indirectly with a.d., and he is not to
be within 100m of any place he knows her to live, work, go to school, frequent
or any place he knows her to be except for court appearances.  mr. jones will
also attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed by his probation officer and sign any releases necessary
to enable his probation officer to monitor his attendance and progress.
there is a mandatory dna order, which i will impose pursuant to
487.051(1).
i will put in place a 110 order for a period of 5 years.
while mr. jones is in custody, he will be bound by a 743.21(1)
order preventing him from having any contact directly or indirectly with a.d.
lastly, pursuant to
criminal code of canada
sections
490.012(1) and
490.013(2)
(a) i will make an order the mr. jones be added to the
sex offender registry and that he comply with the
sex offender registration
act
for 10 years.
released:  july
29, 2025
justice
jennifer campitelli