ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. e.t.
, 2025 oncj 95
date:
2025 02 20
court
file no.:  brampton – central west  3111 998 22 311103022
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
e.t.
reasons
for sentence
before
justice a. neil singh
sentencing
submissions heard on january 16, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on february 20, 2025
christina lynch.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
edmond brown....................................................................... counsel
for the accused e.t.
singh j.:
introduction
after a trial, i found e.t. guilty of a single
count of sexual assault with a weapon. the victim of the sexual assault was his
former spouse, m.s. the couple’s only child from the union, e. was also
victimized by e.t. on that day. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts
i gave detailed reasons for judgment on october
16, 2024. i will try not repeat myself, but it is essential to provide a
factual overview to properly understand my reasons.
(1)
on the morning of saturday, july 16, 2022, m.s.
took her son to his soccer practice.
(2)
e.t. was planning on leaving the country. he
messaged m.s. and asked her to bring their son to see him. he asked her to not
bring his father r.t. who had gone to the soccer field to watch his grandson
play. she agreed.
(3)
e.t. was home alone.
(4)
e.t. texted m.s. and told her to let herself
into the residence as he was getting ready. she did so when she arrived.
(5)
e.t. came downstairs and met m.s. and their son.
(6)
he then went into the basement and retrieved a
large hunting knife. he was paranoid. he told m.s. that someone was trying to
kill him. he locked the doors, closed the windows, and shuttered the curtains.
(7)
he unsheathed the knife and instructed m.s. to
listen to him. he directed her and their son to sit on the floor. they listened.
(8)
e.t. told his son that he needed to see how sex
was done and tried pulling up m.s.’s shirt. m.s. told e.t. “no.”
(9)
e.t., while holding the knife, told m.s. to
listen to him. he turned the tv on for their child and told him to stay there.
(10)
e.t. directed m.s. to the upstairs bedroom. he followed her
upstairs, knife in hand.
(11)
once in his bedroom, e.t. put the knife down on the nightstand. he
closed the windows and curtains. he told m.s. to listen to him. he removed her
clothes. e.t. then picked up the knife and told m.s. that she was going to
follow his rules.
(12)
e.t. proceeded to have forced vaginal intercourse with m.s. at one
point, he removed his penis from her vagina and forced it into her mouth. he
then put his penis back into her vagina and continued having sex with her.
(13)
during the intercourse, e.t. switched between holding the knife and
putting it beside m.s. while he pinned her arms to the bed.
(14)
m.s. told e.t. “no” and to “stop” several times during the sexual
assault.
(15)
while he was assaulting m.s., e.t. called down to his son to come
“see.” he told his son that they needed to have a threesome.
(16)
the child came upstairs, saw his parents in the bed naked, then ran
back downstairs.
(17)
m.s. was able to push e.t. off her shortly afterwards. she grabbed
whatever clothing she could, leaving her underwear behind, and ran out of the
room.
(18)
while she was able to get her pants on, m.s. ran out of the residence
topless. she put her shirt on outside.
(19)
e.t. emerged at the front door with their son. he was holding the
knife. he had the tip pointed to his neck.
(20)
m.s. called to her son, he ran to her, and they made their escape.
i found that e.t. engaged in forced sexual
intercourse knowing m.s did not consent. he used the knife to enable him to
commit the offence by both threatening and intimidating m.s. with it.
circumstances of e.t.
a pre-sentence report was prepared and made an
exhibit on the sentencing hearing. it provided extensive background on e.t.
e.t. is 37 years old. he was 32 at the time of the
offence. he was born in albania. he immigrated to canada when he was 11 years
old. his family settled in peel region and continue to call it home today. he has
one sibling, an older brother. e.t. resides with his parents.
e.t. and those close to him describe an
uneventful childhood in the most positive of ways. there were no significant
traumatic events in his life growing up. he grew up in a supportive and loving
household. e.t. enjoys a strong relationship with his parents and brother. this
is clearly a close family unit. it is also clear that e.t. benefits from a very
supportive extended family network.
e.t. is very intelligent. he was a strong
student. he graduated high school and completed an engineering degree, both
with honours. he has been known to be a leader amongst his peers throughout his
education. e.t. has always maintained gainful employment in his field, although
he is currently laid off due to the winter months being the “off-season” in the
construction field.
e.t. and m.s. met in 2010. they were married in
2015. they had their only child, a son, in 2018. the marriage did not last.
after a few separations and reconciliations, they separated shortly after the
birth of their son. their divorce was finalized in 2022.
e.t. and his family describe his relationship
with his son positively. e.t. did not see his son after he left the country in
july 2022 until may 2024 when he was granted supervised access through the family
court. after he was convicted for this matter, a restraining order was put in
place through the family court. he hasn’t seen him since.
e.t. has no issues with substance abuse. he does
however have mental health issues. he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in
2013. after his diagnosis, his mental health was unstable. he was hospitalized
many times as a result, but never for more than one night at a time. since
december 2023 however, he has been on a new course of medication to manage his
mental health issues. all indications are that this has led to a significant
improvement. it has stabilized e.t. e.t. continues to be compliant with this
new course of treatment.
effect on the victim
m.s. submitted a victim impact statement to the
court. while she perseveres and endures for her son’s benefit, e.t.’s crime has
clearly had a significant and profound negative impact upon her.
the emotional impact has been great. she is constantly
“on edge.” she is wrought with feelings of shame, anger, and guilt. she is
suffering from ptsd. the overall impact has left m.s. struggling to function. the
crime has also affected her son as their collective sense of security has been
ruptured. m.s. and her son have engaged with counselling services, which has
resulted in a negative financial impact upon them. she feels isolated and
vulnerable.
m.s. and e.t.’s son live in fear of him. in the
victim impact statement, their son drew a picture of the knife he saw his
father with on the date of the assault.  perhaps most profound, is the daily
fear m.s. lives with about how this crime might affect her son as he grows up.
position of the parties
the crown recommends a penitentiary sentence of
6 ½ years less time spent in presentence custody. while in custody, they seek a
non-communication order with m.s. pursuant to
s.743.2
of the
criminal code
.
in addition, the crown seeks a s.109 weapons prohibition for life, a dna
databank order, and a
sex offender information registration act
(hereinafter
“soira) order for a period of 20 years.
mr. brown, on behalf of e.t., concedes that a penitentiary
jail sentence is appropriate. however, he asks the court to exercise restraint.
given e.t. has no criminal record, the defence submits that the appropriate
range is three to five years for an instance of forced sexual intercourse in
the context of an intimate partner relationship. mr. brown takes issue with
only one of the requested ancillary orders: the soira order. mr. brown submits since
e.t. is still relatively young, the impact that the soira order is going to have
on his future employment prospects would be grossly disproportionate to the public
interest in making the order.
analysis
sentencing objectives and
principles
the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect
society, contribute to respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful,
and safe society.
every sentence i impose must be proportionate to
the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
in sentencing offenders, the sanctions imposed
by the court must consider the following objectives:
(1)
to denounce unlawful conduct
(2)
to deter the offender and other persons from
committing similar offences
(3)
to separate offenders from society, where
necessary
(4)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders
(5)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims
or the community
(6)
to promote a sense of responsibility in the
offenders and an acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or the community.
in arriving at an appropriate sentence, i must
also consider the relevant aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
the aggravating factors are incredibly
aggravating. they include:
(1)
the circumstances of the offence.
•
forced vaginal and oral penetration;
•
the victim of the sexual assault was a former
intimate partner
;
•
the use of a knife to threaten, intimidate, and
facilitate the sexual assault
;
and
•
the involvement of e.t. and m.s. son in the
attack by showing him the knife, telling him he needs to see how sex is done,
calling him up to his bedroom where he was sexually assaulting his mother, and
telling him they need to have a threesome
.
•
the breach of trust e.t. engaged in against both
m.s. and their son in committing his crime against them.
(2)
the profound and lasting impact the offence has
had on m.s.
(3)
while it is unknown to what extent, the impact
of the offences on e.t. and m.s.’s son is aggravating. from his drawing of the
knife used in the victim impact statement, i find that the impact on the child,
is profound and lasting. even though he was only 4-years-old at the time, this
child still remembers that day approximately two and a half years later.
to be clear, i find that there are two readily
identifiable victims in this case: m.s. and her son. in addition to m.s., e.t.
endangered, abused, and victimized his child during this protracted and
horrific sexual assault. while e.t. may not have physically harmed his child,
the psychological harm cannot be discounted and must be considered by this
court.
the mitigating factors are:
(1)
e.t. has no criminal record.
(2)
e.t.’s background and personal circumstances:
•
e.t. has a very supportive family.
•
he had a stable and happy upbringing.
•
e.t. enjoys a close and healthy relationship
with his parents, and his brother.
•
e.t. completed high school with honours and
attended university graduating with a degree in civil engineering. he excelled
academically in all his educational endeavours.
•
e.t. has been seen as a leader amongst his
peers.
•
e.t. has maintained steady and consistent
employment in his field of study for many years.
(3)
e.t.’s mental health issues
•
e.t. was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in
2013.
•
his mental health status had been unstable for
many years since his diagnosis.
•
since december 2023, e.t. started a new course of
treatment that has brought him the stability he previously lacked. this course
of treatment has led to significant improvement regarding his mental health.
•
e.t. is compliant and willing to continue with
his medical treatment for his mental health issues.
one point of concern however is e.t.’s continued
lack of insight into his mental health issues. his psychiatrist noted that he
has a lack of “insight regarding the presence of bipolar disorder and the
intermittent exacerbations of paranoia involved.” his lack of insight into his
mental health is a source of concern. on the one hand, this lack of insight
might call into question e.t.’s stated commitment to continuing his treatment.
on the other, however, i recognize that e.t. has been compliant with this
course of treatment for approximately 14 months. on a balancing, i find that
e.t. is committed to continuing the treatment for his mental health issues.
i also note that e.t. exercised his
constitutional right to a trial in this matter. that is in no way an
aggravating factor; however, the absence of a guilty plea is an absence of a
mitigating factor.  e.t.’s continued denial of responsibility for his
criminality is relevant when considering his rehabilitative prospects.
discussion
all sentencing objectives are to be given
consideration in coming to an appropriate sentence. it is well known, however, that
in cases involving sexual violence, intimate partner violence, and the
victimization of children, the predominant sentencing principles are
denunciation and deterrence. at the same time, i recognize that e.t. is a first
offender and i must consider his rehabilitation and reintegration into the
community. i acknowledge that i must also exercise restraint. i must sentence
e.t. to the least restrictive sentence available to meet the principles and
objectives of sentencing.
the crown provided a casebook in support of
their position. while the cases are helpful in establishing the appropriate
range for such sentences, i recognize that sentencing is a highly
individualized exercise.
absent some significant mitigating factor, the
forced penetration of another person will typically attract a sentence of at
least three years in jail. the typical range is one of three to five years. of
course, this is simply a range, a tool to assist sentencing judges on where to
start
.
in
sutherland
,
the accused received a global 6-year sentence for sexual assault with a
weapon (knife), assault causing bodily harm, theft under, and fail to comply
with probation. it was after trial.  the court of appeal found that the
sentence was within the appropriate range. i note however, that the accused was
convicted of two violent offences, had a criminal record, and was on probation
at the time he committed the index offences.
in
richards
,
the accuse was sentenced to 6 years for sexual assault with a weapon. the
accused had assaulted two vulnerable sex workers. he was prepared for a
confrontation when he met with them. the victim of the sexual assault was orally,
vaginally, and anally penetrated. the assault took place outdoors in area
frequented by other members of the public.
in s.s.
, the accused used a knife, even holding it to the victim’s throat and
threatened to kill her if she didn’t submit to him. the assault included forced
oral, vaginal, and attempted anal penetration. the accused also forced the
victim to smoke crack cocaine against her will during the ordeal. although not
stated, it appears that this was a lengthy, drawn-out assault. the court notes
that the accused switched between forcing oral sex and attempting anal
penetration approximately 8-10 times before forcing vaginal penetration on the
victim. the victim was a vulnerable woman who spoke limited english and was
sexually assaulted by the accused at her place of employment. importantly, the
accused plead guilty. the accused was sentenced to 6 ½ years in prison.
while no case is exactly on point, these cases
helpfully demonstrate that where the sexual violence involves the use of a
weapon, the range of sentences necessarily trend upward from the low end of the
three-to-five-year range i have referred to, above.
in e.t.’s case, i find his mental health status
an important consideration. i accept that at the time he committed his crime,
he was suffering from the serious and apparent effects of mental illness. that
is abundantly clear from the evidentiary record. it is also supported by his psychiatrist
who stated that his illness includes the “intermittent exacerbation of
paranoia.” i find that e.t.’s mental illness was a contributing factor to his
behaviour and decision-making. it therefore reduces his moral blameworthiness. at
the same time, and for the obvious reasons i have stated above, i find that the
gravity of the offence is very high.
i also find that e.t.’s lack of remorse and
continued denial of responsibility for his criminality negatively impact his
rehabilitative prospects. in this regard, there is a need for greater specific
deterrence than might otherwise be required.
soira
the imposition of the requested
soira
order is discretionary. a
soira
order is only mandatory for this offence
where the crown proceeds by indictment, the sentence is a term of imprisonment
of two years or more; and the victim is under 18 years old
. alternatively, a
soira
order is mandatory if the accused has been previously convicted of a designated
offence or was previously subject to comply with a soira order.
section 490.012(3)
of the
criminal code
directs me to make the a
soira
order unless i am satisfied that accused
has established that (a) there would be no connection between making the order
and the purpose of helping police services prevent or investigate crimes of a
sexual nature by requiring the registration of information relating to sex offenders
under this act; or (b) the impact of the order on the person, including on
their privacy or liberty, would be grossly disproportionate to the public
interest in protecting society through the effective prevention or
investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be achieved by the registration
of information relating to sex offenders under this act.
section 490.012(4)
of the
criminal code
sets
out a list of factors to be considered. i have done so. i note the gravity of
the offence, the use of a weapon in the commission of the offence, the fact
that a child was also victimized by e.t., and that e.t. lacks insight into his
mental health diagnosis and his criminality. i balance these factors against
the fact that the offence was perpetrated against a victim known to e.t., along
with the fact that e.t. has no criminal record.
after considering all the factors at play, i
find that e.t. has failed to establish either of the exceptions to the making
of a
soira
order. i will therefore impose a
soira
order as
required under
s.490.012(3)
of the
criminal code
.
in making the
soira
order, i recognize
the collateral consequences that e.t. will face because of this requirement,
particularly as it relates to employment. because of this, a
soira
order
will assist in specifically deterring e.t to a limited degree. i have
considered this in determining the appropriate length of imprisonment e.t. must
serve.
sentence
when balancing all the principles and objectives
of sentencing and considering the relevant aggravating and mitigating
circumstances, i find that the least restrictive proportionate sentence i can
impose is 5 ½ years jail.
e.t., you will be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of 5 ½ years or 2008 days in a penitentiary
. i will deduct credit for 20
days spent in presentence custody (that is 13 real days credited at a rate of 1
½ days for every day spent in custody). the remaining time to serve is 1,988
days.
you will also:
(1)
be prohibited from possessing weapons for life pursuant
to
s.109
of the
criminal code
;
(2)
provide a sample of your dna today while in
custody pursuant to
s.487.04
(a) of the
criminal code
;
(3)
be subject to the terms of a
soira
order
for a period of 20 years pursuant to
s.490.013(2)
(b) of the
criminal code
;
and
(4)
be prohibited from communicating with m.s. while
in custody pursuant to
s.743.21
of the
criminal code
.
conclusion
i recognize that no sentence i impose will ever make
things better for m.s. or her son. i cannot make them whole again. i can never
undo or fix the trauma they have been forced to grapple with. their lives have
been forever altered. i can only hope they continue to persevere. i wish them
all the best in their journey to recovery and wellness.
e.t., i hope that eventually you come to terms
with your crime. i hope you recognize how incredibly wrong your actions were
and the harm you caused on that day, and since. it is only then that you will
be able to learn and grow from this experience. you are still young and there
is much ahead of you. i wish you the very best going forward. take care, sir.
released:  february
20, 2025
signed:
justice a. neil singh
see
s.718.2(a)(ii)
of
the
criminal code
.
while sexual assault with
a weapon has a longer maximum available sentence than sexual assault
simpliciter
,
there is no mandatory minimum that considers the use of a weapon in the offence.
the use of a weapon is therefore appropriately considered as an aggravating
factor on sentence.
see
s.718.2(a)(ii.1)
and s.718.2(a)(iii)
see. s.718.2(a)(iii.1)
r v. a.j.k.
,
2022 onca 487
at paras
76-77
2016 onca 674
;
2014 oncj
551
2016 onsc 2940
2012 oncj 482
the victim,
m.s.,
was over 18 years old at the time of
the offence.
to arrive at the total number of days, i multiplied 365.25
days by 5.5 years, and rounded down to the nearest whole number (365.25 x 5.5 =
2008.875, rounded down to 2008 days)