ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. grewal
, 2025 oncj 600
date:
november 14, 2025
court
file no. 1260-999-00-3398736f
between:
his
majesty the king  (appellant)
—
and —
kanwaljit grewal (respondent)
before
justice brian g. puddington
heard
on september 12, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 14, 2025
christopher zenko...........................................................................
agent for the appellant
nobody
appeared for the respondent
kanwaljit
grewal
puddington j.:
contents
overview
...
1
facts
..
2
analysis
..
2
conclusion
..
5
overview
under section 11(b) of our
charter of rights and freedoms,
any
person charged with an offence has the right to be
tried
for that
offence within a reasonable time.  in order to determine what constitutes a
“reasonable time”, there must be a clear start and end time.
the “end time” in this case was not in dispute.  where the parties
disagreed was with respect to when the clock started.
the prosecution submitted that the relevant time period started when mr.
grewal decided he wanted a trial.  in this case, that would be after the
completion of the early resolution meeting that mr. grewal had requested.
after meeting with the prosecution, mr. grewal decided he did not want to
resolve his charges and instead requested a trial.
the defence proposed, and the justice of the peace in this case ultimately
agreed, that the total delay in this case was from the moment the certificate
of the offence was filed until the anticipated end of trial.  his worship did
not find any time to be defence delay or an exceptional circumstance.
for the reasons that follow, and with the utmost of respect, i find that
the justice of the peace erred in his calculation of the relevant time periods,
and the crown appeal is allowed, requiring a new trial.
facts
the facts underlying the section 11(b) application are not in dispute.
mr. grewal was charged on january 28, 2023 with careless driving.  it appears
from the record that the certificate of offence was filed on january 30, 2023.
on february 3, 2023, mr. grewal filed an early resolution request, which is
option 2 on the back of the certificate of the offence.  the date provided for
that early resolution was february 6, 2024 – 1 year and 3 days later.
the early resolution meeting took place as scheduled, and it was at this
time that mr. grewal decided he wanted to have a trial.  the anticipated end date
for that trial was august 27, 2024, approximately 19 months after the filing of
the certificate of the offence.
this “total delay” is above the 18 month presumptive ceiling set in the supreme
court of canada’s decision in
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27
and
therefore demands an analysis of its reasonableness.
analysis
as stated, the issue in this appeal is when the clock starts and whether
his worship erred in law in his classification of the time periods.
a review of the jurisprudence on this issue reveals that the time period
for these types of offences starts when the accused elects to have a trial.
in
mississauga (city) v. gordan,
2016 oncj 587
,
a decision rendered by
this court on october 3, 2016, after the supreme court of canada’s july 8, 2016
decision in
jordan
,
the time from the offence to the trial was 13 1/2
months.  as in this case, there was a request by the defendant in
gordan
for
an early resolution meeting.  the time from the charge to the early resolution
meeting was 7 months, though in
gordan
the early resolution meeting was
set by default, because the accused hadn’t actually checked any of the options
on the offence notice.
that
being said, justice duncan of this court found in
gordan
at paragraph
15
that “the time to the resolution meeting should have been excluded by the trial
justice from the 11(b) calculation.  had he done so, he would have inevitably
and correctly dismissed the 11(b) application.”  his honour found support for
this finding in the decision of
mississauga
v.
lam,
2012 oncj no.
5594.  in that case
,
the total amount of delay was 18 months and 29 days.
in dismissing the 11(b) application, the justice in
lam
found at
paragraph 61:
on the question of how to treat the five-month delay from
april 29, 2011, to september 29, 2011, that is associated with the scheduling
and holding the first attendance meeting with the prosecutor,
that period
can be regarded as an implicit waiver by the defendant since the defendant had
opted on april 29, 2011, to have a voluntary or optional first attendance
meeting with the prosecutor
; however, since the purpose or function of
the first attendance meeting is for the resolution of the charge then it is
more suitable and practicable for the 11(b) paradigm to find this delay as part
of a "neutral intake period" that is to be deducted from the overall
length of delay.  (emphasis added).
again,
gordan
(at the trial level) and
lam
were decided prior to
jordan,
and prior to the presumptive ceiling of 18 months articulated in that case.
under the
jordan
framework, courts no longer deal with “neutral intake”
periods of delay.  as correctly pointed out by the justice of the peace in the
present case, we must instead look to defence delay, either explicit or
implicit or exceptional circumstances, which include discrete events or
particularly complex cases.
for clarity, the
jordan
framework was helpfully
summarized
by gillese j.a. in
r. v. coulter
,
2016 onca 704
at paragraphs
34-41
, as follows:
•
calculate the
total delay
, which is the period from the charge
to the actual or anticipated end of trial. (
jordan
, at para.
47
).
•
subtract
defence delay
from the total delay, which
results in the “
net
delay
”. (
jordan
, at para.
66
).
•
compare the net delay to the
presumptive ceiling. (
jordan
,
at para.
66
).
•
if the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, it is
presumptively unreasonable. to rebut the presumption, the
crown must establish the presence of
exceptional
circumstances (
jordan
, para.
47
). if it cannot
rebut the presumption, a stay will follow (
jordan
, para.
47
). in general,
exceptional circumstances fall under two categories: discrete events and particularly
complex
cases. (
jordan
, para.
71
).
•
subtract delay caused by discrete events from the net delay
(leaving the “
remaining delay
”) for the purpose of determining
whether the presumptive ceiling has been reached. (
jordan
, para.
75
).
•
if the remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the court
must consider whether the case was particularly complex such that the time the
case has taken is justified and the delay is reasonable. (
jordan
, at
para.
80
).
•
if the
remaining delay falls
below the presumptive ceiling
,
the
onus is on the defence to show that the delay is unreasonable
. (
jordan
, para.
48
).
defence
delay has two components. the first is delay waived by the defence. “waiver”
can be explicit or implicit, but in either case, it must be clear and
unequivocal. (
jordan
,
at para.
61
).  the second component of defence
delay is delay caused solely by the conduct of the defence. this kind of
defence delay involves those situations where the accused's acts either
directly caused the delay, or the acts of the accused are shown to be a
deliberate and calculated tactic employed to delay the trial.
as
i have already mentioned, despite
gordan
being decided at the trial
level before
jordan,
i find that justice duncan’s reasoning (post-
jordan)
in that case
is still sound in the post-
jordan
age.  as his
honour notes in the third endnote of that decision:
an election to pursue resolution is considered to be a
waiver
of ensuing delay
to the point of change of course toward trial:
lam supra.
see
also recent court of appeal decision
r v coulter
,
2016 onca 704
where
the court considered most of the time that the case was "on a resolution
path" to have been specifically or impliedly waived.  (emphasis added).
section 11(b)
of the
charter
protects a
trial
within a reasonable time.  if the accused is looking to resolve the matter, they
are not at that point pursuing a
trial
.  they are on a different
path – a path that is not covered by the section 11(b) right to a trial within
a reasonable time. a person issued a certificate of an offence is presented
with a choice.  they can choose to have a trial, or they can choose to try and resolve
the matter.  in mr. grewal’s case, he chose to try and resolve the matter, and
therefore he should be seen to have waived his time to a trial up and until he
changed his mind and wanted a trial.
this
is a different dynamic than a criminal trial.  when someone is charged with a
criminal offence, they are immediately on the path towards a trial, and the
clock starts as soon as the information is laid.  there is no option for the criminally
accused to check a box and try to “resolve” the matter.  the state has charged
them, and the state is obligated to get them to trial in a reasonable time in accordance
with
section 11(b)
of the
charter
and the framework outlined in
jordan
.
when a defendant selects a path other than a trial in a
highway traffic act
matter, however, they have essentially waived their right to a timely trial
until such time that they choose to have a trial.
the
justice of the peace in this matter appears to agree with this analysis, at
least from his own reasoning in a recent decision of
burlington (city)
v.
eshed,
2024 oncj 299
.  in this decision, his worship found that 16
months and 10 days between a reopening decision and an early resolution meeting
was defence delay.  in his worship’s view, it was appropriate in that case to
"re-start" the clock after the early resolution meeting on october
24, 2023, because “until that point the applicant had not made clear her
intention to have a trial” (
eshed
at para.
37
).  in support of this
finding, his worship cites
r. v. guiste,
2022 oncj 575
, where at
paragraph
26
, the justice of the peace found that “an appropriate starting date
to begin the deduction of delay is the date of the early resolution meeting”.
i
agree with the decisions in
eshed
and
guiste,
both cases that
were decided under the
jordan
framework, and both of which are
consistent with justice duncan’s analysis in
gordan
.
with
respect to the thorough and thoughtful reasons of the justice of the peace in
this case, i disagree with his worship when he states at paragraph 14 that “it
would be counterproductive to effectively penalize defendants who choose [to
have an early resolution].”  a defendant is not “penalized” because the time
between the charge and the early resolution meeting is not counted on the 11(b)
clock.  it was always open to the respondent, upon learning of the length of
time it would take to get an early resolution, to then change his mind and seek
a trial instead.  he did not do so.  in fact, he did nothing to move the matter
along. he is not “penalized” by having this time categorized as defence delay.
he is merely not having the time he was clearly pursuing a resolution added to
the calculation of delay in an 11(b) analysis.  he always had the option to
pursue a trial.  the moment he did, the state was obligated to have his trial
scheduled and heard within a reasonable time, in compliance with his 11(b)
charter
rights.
up
until the time mr. grewal elected to have a trial, the entire system was
operating on the understanding that it was on the path to resolution.  possible
trial dates came and went while he travelled the potential resolution path.  when
that resolution was not to his satisfaction, mr. grewal was absolutely entitled
to then decide to have a trial. changing his mind, however, does not change the
fact that the time leading up to his election to have a trial was an implicit
waiver of delay.
conclusion
when
the time between the filing of the certificate of the offence and the early
resolution date are deducted as defence delay, then the time to trial falls
well below the
jordan
ceiling.  the approximate 19 months of delay now
becomes a net delay of approximately 7 months.
when
the delay is below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the defence to show
that the delay is unreasonable.  unfortunately, despite being made aware of the
date for his appeal, mr. grewal did not attend at his appeal, nor did he appear
at the interim date that was set prior to the hearing.  i therefore do not have
any submissions from the defence as to why approximately 7 months delay between
electing to have a trial and the end of that trial is unreasonable.  given that
7 months is 11 months below the presumptive ceiling, however, i have little difficulty
finding that the net delay in this case was reasonable in the circumstances.
i
want to be clear, nothing in these reasons should be interpreted as saying that
having to wait 12 months for an early resolution meeting is appropriate.  in
this case, what appears to have justifiably upset the justice of the peace is
the outrageous amount of time it took to have a phone call with a prosecutor.
12 months is, frankly, ridiculous.  if the province or municipality wish to
provide this option to those charged with driving offences, it has to be done
sooner.  no good reason was provided to the justice of the peace in this case
as to why it took as long as it did to have, what i’m sure, is no more than a 5
to 10 minute conversation with a prosecutor.
while
i have found that the time leading up to an early resolution meeting is defence
delay, i would caution the prosecution and hope that these timelines have
significantly shortened since this case.  if not, i suspect that rather than
individuals opting for a resolution meeting, they will simply elect a trial.  this
will result in the clock starting the moment they make that election, and will
leave the prosecution, administration and the courts scrambling to find trial
time.  the chaos and backlog that will flow from that is obvious and
inevitable.
“early”
resolution in this matter was a misnomer.  there was nothing “early” about it.
to effectively address the high volume of cases in the
provincial offences
act
courts, prosecutors need to have resolution discussions at an early
stage – not over a year after the offence occurs.
those
words of caution aside, i ultimately find that the justice of the peace erred
in his calculation of the defence delay and the appeal is therefore allowed.  all
of the evidence having already been heard, including submissions on the trial
proper, the appropriate remedy would be, as requested by the prosecutor, to
send the matter back to the justice of the peace to render a decision on the
trial proper.  unfortunately, pursuant to section
138(2)
of the
provincial offences act
,
where the
appellate court directs a new trial, “it shall be in the ontario court of
justice presided over by a justice other than the justice who tried the
defendant in the first instance”, unless there is a consent of the parties that
it go back before the original justice.  as mentioned already, mr. grewal did
not participate in this appeal, and i cannot therefore obtain his consent to
send it back to the same justice.  a new trial, before a different justice, is
therefore ordered.
released:  november
14, 2025
justice
b.g. puddington
the
trial didn’t actually finish until september 20, 2024, but for the purposes of
this appeal, i will use the end date stipulated by the justice of the peace, as
his worship made no mention of how that additional time should be classified.
coincidently, 18 months and 29 days was
the exact amount of delay found by the justice of the peace in the case at bar.