ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. r.h.,
2025 oncj 163
date:
2025 03 25
court
file no.:  hamilton 4711 998 22 47100974
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
r.h.
reasons
for sentence
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on march 3 and 25, 2025
reasons
released on march 25, 2025
gloria huh............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
geneviève eliany............................................................................ counsel
for the offender
garg j.:
overview
this case requires me to fashion an appropriate
sentence for a mother who abused her son over a nearly three-year period by
striking him with various kitchen utensils. the assaults started when the child
was one-and-a-half years old and continued until he was four. after trial, the
parties jointly proposed a suspended sentence with probation for three years. the
proposed sentence fails to reflect the offender’s moral blameworthiness, the
child’s vulnerability at the time of the offence, and the harmfulness of the
offender’s conduct. imprisonment is required. for the reasons that follow, i
impose an 18-month conditional sentence followed by two years of probation.
authority to impose a higher sentence
the decision of
r. v. anthony-cook
,
2016 scc 43
is well-known.
that case sets out a judge’s limited discretion to “jump” a joint sentencing submission
following a guilty plea.
the ontario court of appeal recently held that
anthony-cook
is
limited to guilty pleas and does not apply after trial:
r. v. wesley
,
2025 onca 51
at paras.
70-87
. by pleading guilty and presenting a joint
submission, the offender is saving court resources in return for near certainty
on what sentence they will receive. the sentencing judge is also often unaware
of weaknesses in the crown’s case and other factors motivating the crown to
offer a lenient sentence. these considerations do not apply post-trial. i have
heard the case and decided its strength—the crown proved the charge beyond a
reasonable doubt. as the court of appeal held in
wesley
at para.
84
:
… trial judges are in a far better position than after a
guilty plea to assess the fitness of a proposed sentence. it is ultimately
trial judges and not counsel who bear the heavy responsibility of imposing a
fit sentence. absent the kind of
quid pro quo
present where the accused
agrees to plead guilty in exchange for a joint submission, i am not persuaded
that policy considerations justify constraining trial judges’ sentencing
discretion by imposing the stringent
anthony-cook
test for departing
from a joint recommendation made following a trial.
while
anthony-cook
does not apply, i nonetheless put the parties
on notice that i was considering a more severe sentence. i gave notice well
before the sentencing hearing so that counsel could make informed submissions. i
re-stated my concerns at the end of their submissions and adjourned the hearing
to permit further argument.
general principles
the goal of any sentence under the
criminal
code
is to protect society, contribute to respect for the law, and help
maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society. the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the offender’s degree of responsibility. the sentence that i impose
must be tailored to the offender’s circumstances and the circumstances of the
offences that she committed.
the court must give primary consideration to
denunciation and deterrence when sentencing an offender for child abuse.
as the supreme court emphasized
in
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
at para.
1
, children are the future of our
country. they are also among the most vulnerable members of our society. they
deserve to enjoy a childhood that is free of violence and abuse—especially from
their own parents. protecting children and their interests are central
humanitarian and compassionate values in canadian society:
baker v. canada
(minister of citizenship and immigration)
,
1999 canlii 699 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 817 at para.
67
.
circumstances of the offender
the offender is now 31 years old. she is the victim’s mother. the
offender was born in guyana and is a canadian citizen. she has four children in
total; the victim is the oldest. i will address the offender’s circumstances in
greater detail when analyzing the mitigating circumstances.
aggravating
factors
i have identified the following aggravating
factors.
pattern of conduct
the one count of assault with a weapon
encompasses a pattern of assaultive conduct: see
friesen
at paras.
131-133
. i was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the offender assaulted
the victim on multiple occasions over a period that almost spanned three years.
she struck the victim with various kitchen utensils, including a spatula.
abusive conduct
in her submissions on the final day of argument,
defence counsel distinguished between cases of child abuse and cases of excessive
discipline. counsel characterized this case as an example of excessive
discipline, which ought to attract a lower sentencing range: see
r. v. f.b.
,
2018 oncj 235
at para.
23
.
i find that “abuse” is the accurate label in
this case. key to this finding is that the offender: (i) used objects as
weapons to strike the victim; and (ii) struck the victim out of anger. in this
situation, the offender’s actions went well beyond the exercise of excessive
discipline by an immature parent unskilled in matters of childcare. a more
severe sentence is thus appropriate:
f.b.
at para.
24
.
impact on the victim
section 718.2(a)(iii.1) deems it aggravating
that an offence had significant impact on the victim considering their age and
personal circumstances; see also
r. v. a.g.
,
2015 onca 159
at para.
73
. i
find that the offence profoundly impacted the victim. i received his impact
statement. it is heartening to see that the victim is doing well in many ways. but
his resolve to lead a happy life does not detract from the negative impacts of
the offender’s actions. the victim’s testimony allows me to make findings about
the impact:
r. v. cook
,
2017 onsc 1434
at para.
39
. the severe emotional
and psychological effect on the victim was obvious. he told the court that certain
questions upset him because counsel “did not know the pain that i went
through”. he later added, “i might forget certain details [of the abuse], but
i’m never going to forget what she has done”. the impact statement also
discloses how the victim remains scared of running into the offender.
breach of trust
there are three statutorily aggravating factors
that are convenient to address together, although they qualify as separate
aggravating factors. the offender abused her son—a member of her family: s.
718.2(a)(ii). the victim was young—the abuse started when he was one-and-a-half
years old and continued until he was four: s. 718.2(a)(ii.1). and the offence
constituted an invasive breach of the victim’s trust given the mother-son relationship:
s. 718.2(iii).
absence of
mitigating factors
some mitigating factors are absent in this case,
and i find that certain other factors should not be treated as mitigating.
not a guilty plea
i am sentencing the offender after trial. it is
not aggravating that the offender exercised her constitutional right to a trial
and required the crown to proving its case. but a guilty plea in this case
would have been significantly mitigating. a plea would have saved the
offender’s young son from the trauma of testifying in court against his mother.
to be clear, the decision to run a trial simply means that the offender does
not benefit from the mitigation of a guilty plea.
the offender has also not expressed remorse for
the offence, which works against her rehabilitative potential.
harm from cas involvement
i understand that allegations of the offender
perpetuating child abuse led to cas involvement in her life for many years. some
of those allegations are now established facts based on my findings in this
case. cas involvement caused the offender to be separated from or have reduced access
to her children. for example, i am told that the current charges contributed to
the offender not living with her two youngest children (neither of whom is the
victim).
defence counsel emphasized how the offender’s
separation from her children caused her significant harm. i have no doubt about
this fact. it must be painful for the offender to see her children grow up
without having a significant role in their lives.
but i decline to consider the harm suffered by
the offender as a mitigating factor. the harm caused by cas involvement neither
speaks to the gravity of the offence nor the offender’s degree of responsibility:
see
r. v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
at para.
48
.
rather, the harm suffered by cas involvement is
a collateral consequence that relates to the offender’s personal circumstances.
collateral consequences can arise from the commission of an offence, the
conviction for an offence, or the sentence imposed for an offence:
suter
at
para.
47
.
i decline to modify the sentence by virtue of
this collateral consequence. when a parent is alleged to repeatedly abuse their
child over an extended time, it is inevitable that the cas will intervene. this
collateral consequence plays a greatly diminished role at sentencing because it
is so directly linked to the nature of the offence:
suter
at para.
49
.
giving effect to this collateral consequence would disrupt the imposition of a
proportionate sentence on parents who abuse their children. counsel argued that
the cas intervention in this case exceeded reasonable expectations. i do not
know every reason that led the cas to act as they did, and i cannot say whether
their involvement went beyond what the allegations would usually precipitate.
i will, however, address how cas involvement has
led the offender to improve her parenting skills.
mitigating
factors
i have identified the following mitigating
factors.
offender’s
improvement
defence counsel argued that the offender has made
positive developments since committing the offence. the evidence presented on
this issue did not always assist. rather than providing information at large, counsel
should focus on presenting admissible evidence that helps resolve the relevant
issues. for example, counsel explained how the offender’s second youngest child
is doing well in school. but this child does not live with the offender, and the
offender has a limited role in the child’s life. i thus cannot draw a meaningful
connection between the child’s well-being and the offender’s parenting.
despite the evidentiary frailties,
i am satisfied that the
offender has made some progress since the offence ended in october 2018. what i
take from the summaries of defence counsel’s interviews with people in the
offender’s orbit is that the offender cares about her two youngest children,
asks questions about their well-being, and helps pay their expenses. and while the
harm
to the offender from cas involvement will not influence my
sentence, it is relevant that the offender
learned lessons
during this
difficult period away from her children. the offender has completed multiple
parenting programs. one report from the john howard society indicates that the
offender actively participated in the community anger awareness program. these
difficult years along with the offender’s progress attenuates the need for a harsh
sentence to accomplish specific deterrence: see
r. v. espina
,
2020 onsc
6342
at para.
40
.
first offender
with employment history
the offender does not have a criminal record.
the trial evidence also indicates that she has been employed as a personal
support worker. these facts speak to the offender’s rehabilitative potential
and her ability to contribute positively to society. i also find it relevant
that the offender has lost employment opportunities due to the charges and could
face employment challenges doing forward.
youthful offender
the offender was a young adult at the time of
the offences. i also find that she was under stress. she was a working mother.
she found moving back home challenging. there might have been some tensions
between the offender and her mother given the status of the offender’s relationship
with the victim’s father.
imprisonment is
required
i will explain why i must impose a harsher
sentence—i.e., imprisonment—than the proposal for a suspended sentence: see
r.
v. nahanee
,
2022 scc 37
at para.
59
(ii).
first, a non-custodial disposition is disproportionate
to the offender’s moral blameworthiness and the harmfulness of her conduct. the
assaults occurred over a prolonged period. the offender should have inherently understood
that her conduct was wrong. lest she had any uncertainty, people brought the
wrongfulness to her attention. for example, the sisters who witnessed the abuse
told the offender that she could not strike the victim. in addition, the cas
was involved on-and-off providing parenting strategies throughout the
offender’s motherhood.
second, i must impose a sentence that emphasizes
denunciation and deterrence: s. 718.01. i choose to prioritize denunciation and
general deterrence while placing slightly less emphasis on specific deterrence.
i have not lost sight of rehabilitation for this young first offender. but it assumes
less priority given the seriousness of the offence. even for youthful first
offenders, “very serious offences and offences involving violence” are excluded
from the principle that sentences for first offenders should emphasize specific
deterrence and rehabilitation:
r. v. tan
,
2008 onca 574
at para.
32
.
child abuse often occurs behind closed doors.
when the abuse is made public, the courts must send a message that protection
of children will be the predominant concern. repeated abuse of a child is an
assault on their dignity and self-worth. the abuse causes physical and
psychological harm with real potential for long-term effects. the abuse in this
case exposed an innocent child to harm at the hands of the very person who was
meant to protect him. the emotional anguish and distress that he suffered was
palpable as he testified before me.
third, the aggravating factors outweigh the
mitigating factors. the gravity of the offence and the offender’s degree of
responsibility are elevated. there are many ways to commit assault with a
weapon. the offence before me falls at the serious end of the spectrum: a grave
breach of trust from assaulting a very young child over many years. the
offender’s status as a first offender is somewhat diluted by the repetitive
nature of the abuse, because the offence cannot be described as an
out-of-character one-off event.
fourth, the jurisprudence supports a custodial
sentence: see
r. v. j.k.
,
2021 oncj 226
and
r. v. ossetchkine
,
2021 onca 698
where courts ordered imprisonment for child abuse.
the crown provided the decision
of
r. v. r.p.
,
2023 oncj 299
, wherein wright j. sentenced the offender
to three years in the penitentiary. the facts in
r.p.
are undoubtedly
more serious. the victim suffered multiple physical injuries, including serious
burning to his pubic area and scrotum from a heating implement. but there are
also features of the present case that are more serious: the offender is the
victim’s mother, whereas the offender in
r.p.
“was standing in as a
parent” (para. 17); the abuse here occurred over multiple years, whereas the
abuse in
r.p.
lasted five months (para.
6
); and the victim here was even
younger than the victim in
r.p.
(para.
5
).
while these details are relevant, they should
not mask the bigger picture. the offender in
r.p.
received a
penitentiary sentence. the parties in this case propose a suspended sentence.
that gulf is too wide. a non-custodial sentence would be disproportionate and
offend the principle that similar sentences be imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
the cases provided by the defence do not compel
me to impose a non-custodial disposition. some of them are not binding on me
because they were rendered outside ontario. the cases are distinguishable in
any event:
•
r. v. espina
,
2020 onsc 6342
: the offender pleaded guilty early in the proceedings. furthermore,
the appeal decision does not speak to the fitness of a more severe punishment.
rather, the sentencing judge erred in law by jumping the joint submission on a
guilty plea.
•
r. c. m.(j.)
,
2015 qccq 2713
: the offender pleaded guilty. he also expressed remorse for his
archaic corrective methods.
•
r. v. capstick
,
2006 nssc 33
: the offence only occurred on one occasion.
•
r. v. j.r.
,
2021
yksc 50
: the victim was considerably older. the judge also put weight on how
the offenders were regarded in the community (paras. 50, 89) and seemingly put
less weight than i will on how the offences impacted the victim.
•
r. v. f.b.
,
2018
oncj 235
: the offender pleaded guilty. he expressed remorse and responsibility
for his actions. he showed “exemplary” improvements in his parenting. he also
faced immigration consequences if convicted.
•
r. v. c.(y.j.)
,
2012 oncj 25
: the offender pleaded guilty. he committed an assault on one occasion.
there were immigration consequences if convicted.
the imprisonment can be served in the community
the next question is whether the term of
imprisonment can be served in the community through a conditional sentence
order. i am satisfied that it can.
i conclude that: (i) the appropriate term of
imprisonment is less than two years;
(ii) serving a conditional sentence would not endanger the community; and (iii)
a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing. while the mitigating circumstances did not persuade
me to impose a suspended sentence, they do persuade me that a conditional
sentence is appropriate.
i must apply the restraint principle. as doherty
j.a. endorsed in
r. v. hamilton
,
2004 canlii 5549
(ont. c.a.) at para.
96
: “restraint means that prison is the sanction of last resort … restraint
also means that when considering other sanctions, the sentencing court should
seek the least intrusive sentence and the least quantum which will achieve the
overall purpose of being an appropriate and just sanction”. a conditional
sentence will encumber the offender’s liberty but is far less intrusive than
true incarceration.
while the evidence presented on the offender’s
progress was not particularly compelling, i am sufficiently satisfied that the
lessons she learned, the programming she took, and the passage of time combine
to reduce her risk profile such that a conditional sentence would not put the
community at risk.
finally, i conclude that a lengthy conditional
sentence is required. “[t]he more serious the offence and the greater the need
for denunciation, the longer and more onerous the conditional sentence should
be”:
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5
at para.
106
. to sufficiently denounce the
offender’s conduct and promote in her a sense of responsibility, i find that the
conditional sentence must be longer than what a carceral term would have been.
disposition
i impose an 18-month conditional sentence. the
offender will be on house arrest for the first 9 months, followed by a curfew for
the subsequent 6 months. the house arrest and curfew conditions will have appropriate
exceptions.
the conditional sentence is followed by two
years of probation.
in terms of ancillary orders, i require the
offender to provide a sample of her dna, prohibit her from possessing weapons for
10 years under
s. 110
of the
criminal code
, and give her time to
pay the $100 victim surcharge.
released:  march
25, 2025
signed: justice davin m.k. garg
section 718.01 directs the court to give primary consideration to denunciation
and deterrence when sentencing for an offence that involved the abuse of a
person under eighteen years old.
defence counsel resisted the ordering of a pre-sentence report. when the court
signaled a desire to order one, counsel indicated that she would advise the
offender to not participate in the process. no report was ordered.
a conditional sentence remains a sentence of imprisonment, albeit one
served in the community.
i would have reached this conclusion even if a penitentiary
sentence was legally available.