ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. k.l.,
2025 oncj 132
date:
2025 01 14
court
file no.:  pembroke 21-0533
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
kl
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on august 30, december 11, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 14, 2025
lori crewe............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
kl.................................................................................................................... on
his own behalf
richardson j.:
introduction
jb was a grade 7 student interning at the radio
station where kl worked.  i found that kl:
a)
kissed jb while they were at the radio station.  after the kiss, kl
withdrew and admitted that he should not have done that.
b)
kissed jb on the couch at the residence of a mutual friend and then
had sexual intercourse with jb.
the issue in this case is what the appropriate
sentence should be.
when jb testified, she was 33 years old.  the
offences took place when she was 12 or 13 years old.  when these offences took
place, the age of consent was 14 years old.  the accused would have been
between 31 and 33 years old.
the evidence at trial is that jb left the
renfrew county area when she was approximately 16 years old.  she returned in
2021.  she reported the incident after she moved back.  she stated that she
reported the incident because she saw the accused following her when she was
riding her bike.  she also saw him in his car near her residence when her own
children were playing outside.
kl did not testify at trial.
i heard this trial in late 2022 and early 2023.
i rendered judgment on february 15, 2023.  that judgment is now reported at
r.
v. k.l.
,
2023 oncj 247 (canlii)
.
i ordered the preparation of a pre-sentence
report and a report pursuant to section 21 of the
mental health act
.
in the meantime, kl discharged his trial
counsel. there were also a number of adjournments to facilitate kl attending to
meet dr. gojer, who prepared the section 21 report and to allow for kl to make
inquiries with respect to obtaining counsel.  at the end of the day, kl
indicated that he wished to represent himself.
the pre-sentence report
kl is 55 years of age.  he has one prior
conviction for assault, which was registered in owen sound, ontario on february
26, 1998.
he was an only child who grew up in toronto.  he
was raised by his mother.  his father left when he was three.  he had some
visits when his father left.
kl reported that his mother did not always
work.  she went through a number of boyfriends.  she was physically abusive to
kl.  there were periods of time when kl’s grandparents raised him, and although
they were strict, they were loving and they rarely physically disciplined him.
when kl met with the author of the pre-sentence
report, he reported that he and his mother’s relationship is somewhat
estranged.  his assault charge involved him hitting his mother.  he insists
that he was defending himself from her.
he completed his probationary period without
breach or incident although the report indicates what i consider less than
satisfactory engagement on kl’s part in relation to counselling.
transportation was noted to be a problem.
kl has had at least one long-term relationship.
it ended about ten years ago after an argument between his girlfriend and his
mother.  kl has been single since.
kl denied having any learning disability, but
indicated that he attended “special” classes with a low student-teacher ratio.
he reported completing grade 11, attending community college and later
completing his high school diploma.
he has worked doing farm work, as a military
reservist, a handyman, a groundskeeper for a carnival, in a body shop,
advertising, sales, janitorial work and a bicycle repair man.  while he was
working for the carnival, he suffered a closed head injury as a result of a
motorcycle accident.  he received some compensation for his injuries which he
lived off until it ran out in 1995.
he received social assistance until march 2023.
his social assistance ended due to a move from the owen sound area to renfrew
county and he did not intend to reapply.
kl stated that he has not used alcohol in over
ten years.  he may have had a drinking problem when he was young but stopped.
he attended aa for a while.
kl does not accept responsibility for the
offence. he states that the allegations are false. he asked the author of the pre-sentence
report to write to the king to request a pardon.  he told her that once his
name is cleared he is going to go to ukraine to help people.
the author of the pre-sentence report indicated
that kl was a past client of mental health services in owen sound.  unfortunately,
that agency apparently did not reply to requests for information.  kl stated
that he has attended a drop in centre for individuals with mental health
illnesses.  he denies ever being diagnosed with a mental illness.
the author of the pre-sentence report
interviewed kl’s cousin, dm.
dm stated that kl told her that what occurred
with jb was all a misunderstanding and jb was motivated by the “me too”
movement.
dm stated that kl’s mother was emotionally
abused by his father and that is why they separated.  to her knowledge, kl’s
mother was a teacher.  after the separation, they moved around a lot and kl’s
mother changed jobs a lot.  she confirmed what kl stated about numerous
boyfriends.  she did not recall that kl lived with his grandparents from time
to time.  dm hypothesized that one of kl’s mother’s boyfriends harmed kl when
he was younger.
there might be something to this. kl told the
author of the pre-sentence report that when he was in grade 11 he painted a
school locker because his step-father, who was a cross-dresser, attempted to
dress kl in women’s clothing.
dm stated that kl holds a great deal of anger
towards his mother.
dm stated that kl is artistic and musical.  he
plays music at the church he attends.  he paints, writes, plays music and is
registered as a song writer.
i will comment more about this below, but kl is
something of a hermit and a luddite.  dm reported that at one time he lived in
a cabin without electricity or heat.
dm reported that kl was injured in a motorcycle
accident.  she believed that he had some cognitive issues as a result of his
head trauma.
dm was concerned that kl had cancer which he was
doing nothing about.  he was supposed to have a biopsy at the owen sound
hospital but did not follow through.  she also expressed concern about issues
with his teeth.
the s. 21 report
i have not repeated information already set out
in my review of the pre-sentence report.
dr. julian gojer is the acting clinical director
of the royal ottawa hospital.  timely preparation of the section 21 report was
delayed by transportation and communications difficulties.  dr. gojer’s first
report is dated september 7, 2023.
kl denied committing the offence when he was
interviewed by dr. gojer.  his answers, however, seemed odd.  he told dr. gojer
that the charges came about as a result of “legal warfare”.  he stated that
there were a number of bicycle thefts in town and he was asked by some of his
clients to investigate them.  he discovered that someone driving a van was responsible
for the thefts.  he determined that the owner of the van was jb’s husband.
kl reported that his father was still alive and
living in oakville.
he repeated the same information that he gave to
the author of the pre-sentence report regarding his upbringing.  he reported
that the cross-dressing incident took place when he was 10.  he stated that his
mother beat him as a result of that incident.
he reported that he learned how to play cello,
banjo, ukulele and guitar in high school.
he studied computers and logistics management at
george brown college.
he was more forthcoming with dr. gojer about his
relationship history.  he stated that he started dating when he was 18.  he had
a brief relationship while in college, another relationship that ended after
his motorcycle accident (she was also apparently a passenger on the motorcycle
when that accident took place), a common law relationship for two and a half
years which ended when she decided to move to toronto.
he had another common law relationship that
ended after she became involved with another man.   he told dr. gojer that the
woman put a curse on him that he would not be happy with a woman.
after this he dated casually.  he had a
relationship with a woman from halifax in 2016.
he estimated that he has 12 different sexual
partners.
he identifies as heterosexual.  he denies
interest in children, teenagers, sexual violence, fetishes, bdsm, bestiality,
exhibitionism, toucherism, frotteurism or cross dressing.
he is a smoker. consistent with the pre-sentence
report, he denied use of alcohol.  he reported using cannabis occasionally.
he told dr. gojer that he was asthmatic when he
was a child.  he reported not one but two head injuries due to motorcycle
accidents which took place the same year.  he reported seizures after that.
these seizures involve a toe and hand having contractions.  he agreed that he
has been investigated for cancer but did not follow up with further
assessment.
dr. gojer reported that he was pleasant, easy to
interview, but guarded.
he concluded that kl does not suffer from any
major mental illness.
dr. gojer indicated that, “he seems to have
grown up lacking affectionate attachments.  his offending can be best
understood as a boundary violation and not indicative of sexual deviation.”
he recommended that kl attend at the royal
ottawa hospital for neuropsychological assessment and recommended assessment
for a seizure disorder.
i was surprised by the brevity of the report.
transportation to ottawa was an issue for kl and the report was completed
remotely.  as the crown would later point out, the report relies almost
exclusively on kl’s self-report.  additionally, there is no meaningful
assessment of his personality and mental make up through the various
psychometric instruments that one normally sees in reports of this nature.   kl
also did not undergo phallometric testing.
i drew this to dr. gojer’s attention and
apparently kl was ultimately subjected to further testing.  dr. gojer wrote a
short letter, dated may 10, 2024 in which he stated:
mr. [kl] was
referred for a further evaluation with respect to sexual behaviours.  he was
seen in the laboratory and underwent erotic preference testing.  his overall
responses were low and no conclusion could be drawn with respect to the
presence of pedophilia in a laboratory setting.
once again, i was surprised by the lack of
thorough psychometric evaluation.
i also remain concerned that mr. lillico may be
subject to some sort of cognitive deficit which would reduce his moral
blameworthiness.
evidence of dr. gojer – august 30,
2024
i
asked that dr. gojer attend for examination and cross-examination.  he
testified on august 30, 2024.
he
testified that phallometric testing has its limitations and is only used to
make clinical decisions.
he
stated that based on the tests that he completed, he did not diagnose kl with
pedophilia.
dr.
gojer was of the view that kl has a problem with boundaries, which can be
addressed in counselling for inappropriate sexual behaviours, trauma and
impulse control.  some of this counselling could be done on an outpatient basis
through the royal ottawa hospital.
with
respect to sentencing options, dr. gojer noted that the federal system has a
number of sentencing options including warkworth institution and bath institution.
if sentenced to a penitentiary, kl would be classified at millhaven institution,
which generally takes about 90 days.
provincially,
dr. gojer noted that kl could be recommended to serve his sentence at the
ontario correctional institute (oci) in brampton or the st. lawrence valley
treatment centre in brockville.
in
order to be accepted at oci, kl would have to receive a sentence of nine
months.
st.
lawrence valley is designed for inmates with a history of trauma and major
mental illness.  kl would not be accepted for admission there unless dr. gojer
endorsed it.
with
respect to my concerns in relation to kl’s cognitive ability, dr. gojer
expressed the opinion that, kl has “at least got average intelligence” and he
is “capable of doing group counselling.  he indicated that kl would ultimately
benefit from a neuro-psych assessment.
with
respect to the impact of kl’s experience of childhood trauma, dr. gojer
indicated that individuals like kl can become more needy for love and affection
and seek it in inappropriate ways.  they turn to younger people for affection.
with
respect to kl’s lack of remorse and acceptance of responsibility, dr. gojer was
of the view that there is a realistic possibility that kl would accept some
treatment designed to reduce reoffence even if he does not take
responsibility.
the victim impact statement
jb
reports that kind of impacts that are all too familiar in cases of child sexual
abuse, including:
a)
being
uncomfortable with intimacy.  she reported gaining weight in order to  keep men
away from her.
b)
suicidal
ideation.
c)
hospitalization
for self harm.
d)
psychiatric
admission.
e)
homelessness for
a number of years.
f)
self
blaming.
g)
drug and alcohol
addiction, particularly when she was a teenager.
h)
emptiness and
lack of control.
i)
inability
to trust.  she admits to sabotaging relationships in order to keep everyone at
arm’s length for her own safety and sanity.
j)
she has
withdrawn from sports and other activities and is agoraphobic.
k)
she started
smoking.
l)
paranoia.
m)
her weight gain resulted in
a deep vein thrombosis that required surgery and a two month stay in hospital.
n)
inability to
hold down a job or volunteer position or go to school for a sustained period of
time because she will dissociate and “drop myself out of reality” and become
unresponsive, sometimes for minutes and hours.  she indicated that when she comes
out of this, she is unaware that it happened.  these instances are
uncontrollable and unpredictable.
o)
she is no
longer able to visit the killaloe area for any length of time and her visits
“home” are less frequent.
fortunately,
at last check, jb had a solid relationship with her partner and she has
children.  she has fought hard and continues to fight hard to try to regain
control of her life.  she has managed to do all this despite her autism.
submissions on sentence – december 11, 2024
submissions of the crown
the
crown seeks a sentence of six years in the penitentiary, an order for the
taking of kl’s dna, a soira order, a section 161 order, a section 743.6 order
and a section 109 weapons prohibition.
the
crown pointed to the fact that kl was in a mentor-like relationship with jb and
that this was a breach of trust.
the
crown highlighted the fact that kl did not have remorse or insight with respect
to this offence or the offence against his mother in 1998.
the
crown pointed out that there were no issues identified in the section 21 report
or the other evidence that focused on reduced moral blameworthiness on the part
of kl.
the
crown acknowledged that the evidence suggests that kl is a low risk to
reoffend.
submissions of kl
kl
reiterated that he was not guilty of the charges.  he repeated that he was
trying to track down bicycle thefts in his neighbourhood and he got too close
to the person responsible.  he stated that a third party told him that if paid
$20,000, the charges would “go away”.   i note that kl did not testify at his
trial and thus i cannot, at this stage, assess any of that evidence.
he
expressed frustration at the 44-month delay in getting the matter through the
trial process and to the sentencing.  i agree that there has been some delay,
but this was caused by a combination of the covid-19 pandemic and the delay in
sentencing is a result of kl’s difficulties with communications and
transportation in having reports completed and his decision to discharge his
lawyer.  for example, as late as september 2024, we had to get a local social
service agency involved in facilitating contact between kl and dr. gojer.
kl
reported that when he is in pembroke he lives in his cousin’s basement.  when
he is in killaloe, he resides in the home of a friend.  he stated that he was
saving up to buy a small piece of land where he can build a home and bicycle
repair shop.
he
repeated most of the job history that he gave to the probation officer and dr.
gojer.  he stated that he last worked in september 2024 on a movie set that was
filming in the area.  he only worked in this job for a few days.
he
says that he has been self employed in bicycle repair for 15 years.
he
studies russian and ancient architecture.
he
does not use drugs or alcohol.  he indicated that he will celebrate 12 years of
sobriety in february.
kl
stated that he is engaged to a 35 year old woman.  he stated that he was
offered a dowry if he “succeeded in this wedding arrangement” which would
provide him enough money to finance his building project.  his wedding plans,
like everything else in his life, is on hold pending the outcome of this case.
he
stated that he has no “claimable” indigenous ancestry, but he believes he is
one sixteenth algonquin.
he
last saw his mother who is still alive about two years ago.  he got a letter
from her before the postal strike in the fall of 2024.
his
father is still alive.  he last saw him six years ago.  he stated that his
father was “a drinker”. kl denies witnessing domestic violence between his
mother and father.  they divorced when he was three or four.  he saw his father
about every two months.
with
respect to his head injury as a result of his motorcycle accident, kl reported
that he still deals with the effects of this, which can include random dizziness,
nervousness and a slightly different perception of time and space.  he
attributed these latter symptoms to his penchant for older technology.  he has
a car that was manufactured in the mid-1950s.  he has collected upwards of a
dozen typewriters.
kl
has asthma for which he uses an inhaler.
he
has lost some of his teeth.
he
has some skin conditions which he attributed to a rash, ticks or scabies.  he
did not think it was permanent.
for
exercise, he rides his bicycle daily.
he
attends church regularly and as set out above, he plays music at church.  he
stated he can play guitar, steel, banjo, mandolin, viola and cello.
i
asked him about being dressed up as a woman by his step-father.  when i asked
him how many times that happened, he said, “once is enough.”
he
stated that it is not natural for him to go out and steal or hurt people.
“there are people that hurt people and steal daily.  i’m not one of those.
when i come up against one of those, i tend not to do too well”, he said.  he
described himself as someone who is always willing to help others.  “people
trust me and tell me things.  i listen to people.  that’s one of my strong
points.  i am very good at it.  a bicycle mechanic is like a bartender or
mental health worker.  i hear their problems while i fix their tires.”
analysis
but
for this offence, kl is an interesting and likeable individual.  some people
would describe him as eccentric.  others would say that he is a loner.  i continue
to be concerned about whether there are any neuro-psychological deficits and
hope that the penal authorities will ensure that he is rigorously tested.  it
may be that his tendency to be an eccentric loner is simply part of his
personality.  it may also be that it is connected to his brain injury.
despite
his views on the nature and outcome of this case, kl is respectful of the
court.  he is respectful in his demeanour and submissions.
kl
is a survivor.  he has worked through life at whatever he could find to get
by.  although his car is not running, he manages to get to pembroke for every
court attendance.  i have seen him riding his bike in pembroke.  he thrives on
old ways and making old machinery work.
despite
some nagging doubt about the presence of a cognitive deficit, i accept dr.
gojer’s opinion that kl is of at least average intelligence.  on the evidence
before me, i am unable to find “diminished moral blameworthiness”.
i
also accept dr. gojer’s opinion that kl is very likely a low risk to reoffend
and the offence comes out of problems with boundaries that may have developed
as a result of kl’s experiences as a child.
i
am worried about how kl will do in any penal setting.  he has never been
imprisoned before.  it is going to be extremely difficult for him.
all of that said, there is very little in
mitigation here.
kl’s offence has caused significant harm to jb.
he does not accept responsibility for it and attributes her complaint to the
metoo movement.  he maintains his innocence, which is his right.
however, he is not entitled to any of the
mitigation that would have come with a guilty plea.
he also lacks insight.
the offence was committed when jb was a young
student intern at a local radio station.  kl was an announcer there.  this is a
significant breach of trust.
there is a significant age difference between kl and jb at the time
of the offence.  he was over twice her age.  that is a significant aggravating
factor.
i looked at his release order to determine whether his release
conditions have been so onerous as to entitle him to credit pursuant to
r.
v. downes
(2006),
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca)
.  kl was released on a form 10 on
june 4, 2021 with minimal conditions requiring him to notify police of change
of address, employment or occupation and to have no communication with jb.  he
is not entitled to
downes
credit.
on the facts that i heard, before the sexual intercourse took place,
there was a kiss in the radio station.  then there was the kissing that led to
intercourse at the home of the friend.  there was time between the two.  on the
evidence of jb, which i accepted, kl immediately recognised that the kiss was
wrong and withdrew.  he knew that sexual relations with jb were inappropriate.
yet he proceeded on the second occasion.  this is aggravating.  fortunately,
however, this is not a case where there were multiple instances of sexual
violation of jb over a period of years.
on the last occasion, the sexual interference of jb involved sexual
intercourse.  this is a significant violation of her sexual integrity and is
aggravating.
kl’s criminal record is old – it dates to 1998.  what is important
about it, however, is the fact that he does not accept responsibility for that
offence either, something that appears to be a problematic theme in kl’s
personality.
in
r. v. lacasse
2015 scc 64
, the supreme court of canada
determined that the “cardinal principle” of sentencing law is the principle of
proportionality; that is, the more serious the crime and the greater the degree
of responsibility, the more severe the sentence will be.  this must be balanced
against the moral blameworthiness of the offender.
lacasse
also describes sentencing as a
“delicate task”.  other cases have established the principle that sentencing is
a highly individualized process.
in
r. v. friesen
2020 scc 9
, at paragraph
5
, the supreme
court of canada made it clear that the law of sentencing with respect to sexual
offences against children must change:
we send a
strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that
wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerability and cause profound harm to children,
families and communities.  sentences for these crimes must increase.  courts
must impose sentences that are proportional to the gravity of sexual offences
against children and the degree of responsibility of the offender, as informed
by parliament’s sentencing initiatives and by society’s deepened understanding
of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children.
sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness of sexual violence against
children and the far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children,
families and society at large.
at paragraph 114, the court provided further guidance:
the message is
that mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children
are normal and that upper single-digit and double-digit penitentiary terms
should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances.
we would add that substantial sentences can be imposed where there was only a
single instance of sexual violence and/or a single victim.
in my view, the appropriate sentence in this case is five years in
the penitentiary and that is what i will impose.
i recommend that the penal authorities consider immediate placement
of kl at either warkworth institution or bath institution.
i also recommend that the penal authorities complete a thorough
neuro-psychological assessment of kl.
with respect to the crown’s request for a section 161 order, i agree
that:
a)
for the rest of his life he is prohibited
from being within two kilometers of any place he knows jb to live, work, go to
school, frequent or any place he knows that she is likely to be.
b)
for the rest of his life, he is prohibited from seeking, obtaining
or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated or
becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity that involves being in a position
of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years.
c)
for the rest of his life, he is prohibited from having any contact
with a person under the age of 16 years except for
incidental contact or contact during short commercial transactions.
with respect to the crown’s request for the section 743.6 order
prohibiting contact or communication directly or indirectly, by any physical,
electronic or other means, with jb while he is serving his sentence, this order
is granted.
with respect to the crown’s request for a section 109 order, this
order is granted for a period of ten years.
with respect to the crown’s request for an order for the taking of
kl’s dna, this order is granted.  this is a primarily designated offence.
with respect to the crown’s request for an order requiring kl to
comply with the
sex offender registration information act
, this order is
granted for a period of twenty years.
given that kl has not worked in some time and will be going into
custody for a significant period of time, i find that it would constitute an
undue hardship to impose the victim fine surcharge and i order it waived.
released:  january
14, 2024
signed:
justice j.r. richardson