ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. a.c.,
2025 oncj 660
date:
2025 12 11
court
file no.:  pembroke 24-37100497
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
ac
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on november 13, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 11, 2025
richard morris.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
michael figol............................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
j.r. richardson,
j.:
introduction
ac is charged with:
a)
assaulting bb on april 2, 2024;
b)
assaulting sb on april 2, 2024; and
c)
breaching a recognizance pursuant to
section 811
of the
criminal
code
.
the crown elected to proceed summarily.
i was advised at the outset of the trial that
identity and jurisdiction are admitted.
the crown invited the court to acquit ac of the
charge of assaulting sb and breaching his recognizance.   consequently, the
issue in this case is whether the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that ac assaulted bb.
for the reasons that follow, i find ac not
guilty as charged.
the context of this case
this case involves allegations of assault made
by a parent or person in place of a parent, ac, against an eleven-year-old boy,
bb, who suffers from mental health issues.
in pleading not guilty, ac advanced several
defences, including section 43 which exempts some exercises of physical control
over children for the purpose of correction.
the availability of the defence in section 43 continues
to be very controversial, despite the passage of over twenty years since the
supreme court found it constitutional and provided detailed direction to trial
courts on its interpretation.
i have touched on some of those controversies
below.
parenting is one of the most difficult
endeavours known to humankind.
children do not come with an owner’s manual.
children with mental health issues are even
harder to understand and manage.
parenting skills are passed from generation to
generation.
good parenting is something that one often learns
from observing the examples that their elders have set.  if a person is subjected
to poor parenting – or they are robbed of the opportunity to be parented at all
– there is a stronger likelihood that they themselves will turn out to be poor
or absent parents.
sometimes, experiencing poor parenting will
result in the opposite effect.  a child who has been reared by poor parents
will sometimes be able to develop the insight to try to be a better parent and dedicate
themselves to doing so.
there is increasing polarization in canadian
society about when it is appropriate for the law to intervene with respect to
the parenting of the children.
many see parenting as a private matter upon
which the state should not tread.
others see it as a public matter about which
there needs to be considerable education.  in their view, the state should
intervene to ensure that people parent appropriately and correct those who do
not.  systemic poor and absent parenting can have devastating and far-reaching
social and financial costs.
as i illustrate herein, the legislation and
caselaw attempts to balance these competing views.  like any balancing
exercise, for many, the resolution will never be perfect.
it is an ongoing process that must be informed
by advances in child psychology.
it must also recognise that like any human
endeavour, there is no such thing as a perfect parent and the law must resist
imposing that standard.
this case exposes this tension.
the evidence of cc and the video
surveillance of the incident
cc is the spouse of ac.  they have four
children:
a)
sb who was 12 at the time of the incident;
b)
bb who was 11 at the time of the incident;
c)
w who was five at the time of the incident; and
d)
l who was a baby at the time of the incident.
bb
has been diagnosed with adhd and has a history of anger issues.  on april 2,
2024, he became extremely agitated despite having taken his prescribed
medication, risperdal. that morning, he began throwing objects, including one
item which struck l’s bouncy chair. this made him angrier. shortly afterward, bb
went to the kitchen drawer, retrieved a large knife, and threatened to kill
everyone in the house, saying he would “slit their throats”. cc stated that
this was not the first time bb had made such threats.
cc
intervened after bb struck her. she restrained him and managed to take the
knife from his hands. ac got up during the altercation.  she surmised that he
was “protecting others” from bb.  ac grabbed bb by the legs, but bb quickly got
to his feet and sustained no injuries. cc tried to get bb to the medicine
cabinet for additional medication, but he refused.
cc
described bb’s ongoing hostility toward l, suggesting jealousy or middle-child
syndrome. she said bb hated l and abused l whenever possible. this was the
first time bb had thrown something at l, but he had previously accessed knives
in unrelated incidents involving his sister. cc noted that bb remains difficult
to discipline and that neither her nor ac has a definitive method of control.
she opined that ac is generally calmer.
cc
also disclosed that family and children’s services (“fcs”) have been involved
from time to time and that she has previously called the police in august for
similar threats involving knives and harm to family members.
cc
explained that her father pressured her to call the police and report the
incident.  she did not consider ac’s actions abusive and she believed that they
were justified in the circumstances.
with
respect to how she succumbed to her father’s pressure, cc stated that she had
suffered a prior sexual assault and postpartum challenges.
bb
remains in cc’s custody. since the incident, the dosage for his medication has
been significantly increased, which has helped reduce his outbursts. cc has
also engaged in school counselling and attempted to learn coping strategies,
calming techniques and grounding methods.  she stated that before april 2, 2024
she had no formal training to manage bb’s behavior.
when
the incident occurred, cc first attempted to get bb to take his medication, but
he refused. she then tried to place him in a time-out.
a
video of the incident from a security camera installed in the kitchen was
entered into evidence as exhibit 1.  cc stated the system was installed partly
on the suggestion of fcs. the purpose of the cameras was to protect the family,
as the children had previously made statements that turned out to be false.
cameras were placed in the kitchen, downstairs, in the garage, and at the door.
cc did not recall when the system was installed but believes it uses a hard
drive for storage.
the
quality of the video is not great.  rather than properly extract the video so
it could be clearly shown in court, the police took a video of the video with
their own cell phone.  the video, which was 38 seconds long, reveals the
following:
a)
when the video
opens, the camera shows the kitchen of the home where the incident occurred.  a
kitchen island is in the foreground.  cc has her back to the camera.  bb is
facing cc.  there is another child seated at the island.  cc testified that
this child was her son w, who was eating and watching something with headphones
on his ipad.  cc is holding bb’s hands and she moves away from the camera
toward the counter behind the island while holding his hands.
b)
at 0:07, bb
yanked cc away from the kitchen counter in the corner more toward the centre of
the kitchen counter located behind the kitchen island.
c)
at 0:10, another
child, who cc identified as sb, entered the kitchen.  cc and bb were
struggling.
d)
at 0:13, bb
stopped yanking on cc’s arm and moved toward her.  cc put her arm around bb.
ac enters the kitchen by walking around the island and approaching bb and cc
from the left.  cc testified that at this point she turned her head and spoke
to ac.  she does not recall what she said.  she also stated that bb will often
start hugging her in the midst of a tantrum.  that is what he was doing when he
moved toward her.  she stated that bb was also now focused on ac.  she believed
that bb was aware that he was about to be disciplined.
e)
at 0:14, bb
moved so that cc was between him and ac.  cc has her back to ac.
f)
at 0:18,
ac moved toward bb. ac moved cc out of the way to get closer to bb.  up to this
point, cc stated that she was trying to take bb from ac and lead bb to a
time-out. she did not recall feeling ac’s physical presence, although the video
clearly depicts this.  she stated that she backed away to allow ac to
discipline bb.
g)
at 0:20 ac moves
so that bb is out of the view.  bb is now between ac and the kitchen counter
which runs behind the island. ac has his back to the camera.   cc is to ac’s
left by a distance (given their arm lengths) which i estimate at four to five
feet (two arm lengths).
h)
at 0:24, ac and bb struggle.  cc moves past them to go toward the
corner on the right of the kitchen counter behind the island.  cc testified
that the cupboard where bb’s medication is stored is in this corner and she was
trying to get more medication.  she also stated that she was trying to defuse
the situation and stop the “chaos in the house” which she attributed to bb.
she stated that in her belief, ac did not contribute to the “chaos in the
house”.
i)
at 0:28, ac lifts bb up by the shoulders.  bb falls forward.  ac
bends over bb.   ac grabbed bb by his legs or feet.  they continued to struggle
while bb was on the floor.
j)
at 0:29, cc turned her head to watch.  she is still at the right
side of the counter that is behind the kitchen island.
k)
at 0:32, cc left her position and moved closer to ac and bb who were
still struggling.  she is motioning with her arm.
l)
at 0:38, the video ends.
cc explained that the video was taken after the
incident with the knife.  she stated that she looked for a longer video which
showed the knife incident and events before what was recorded but she could not
find it.
cc stated that during the altercation, bb struck
her on her right cheek. she restrained him by holding his arms and told him he
was not going to hurt her. the strike did not leave a mark, as bb was a child
and could not hit hard, however cc emphasized the principle of the act and her
concern for safety. she stated that she was worried about bb hurting her and
others.
cc stated that she was concerned about the knife
and the overall situation. her plan was to get bb to the medicine cabinet,
located up and to the right, administer additional medication, and then place
him in a time-out to calm down. she acknowledged that a verbal interaction
occurred but could not recall specific words, explaining that she was
flustered, overstimulated, and overwhelmed. bb was angry, defiant, and unruly.
she attempted to reason with him for about 15 minutes.
cc recalled telling bb they were going to get
his medication, while bb repeatedly said, “no.” she admitted she did not
remember what she was trying to accomplish at that moment beyond calming him
down.
cc
stated that she did not want bb to get into trouble and she admitted feeling
upset with ac for intervening. she believed ac’s involvement would make the
situation worse because when both parents “tag-team” bb, his anger escalates.
cc
explained that in the last ten to twelve seconds of the video she was trying to
get ac to stop, walk away and let bb cool down.  she wanted to stop the matter
from escalating further.  she stated that the other children were present, and
l was screaming.
cross-examination of cc
cc
does not recall what occurred immediately after the incident. she reported the
matter to police a couple of weeks later, after speaking with her father and
showing him the video. cc explained that her father convinced her to report it
because she was in a very bad mental state at the time. she added that she
believed her father’s dislike for ac influenced his advice.
regarding
bb throwing objects at l, cc could not recall the specific object but confirmed
it hit near l’s head while l was in a bouncy seat close to where cc was
standing. cc said that when bb took the knife, he made a throat-slashing
gesture with his right hand, moving from left to right.
cc
confirmed bb did not scream in pain during the incident and he did not complain
of being hurt. cc explained that bb has a designated time-out spot in the
hallway near the garage door. when bb cannot calm down, he is placed there
until he is ready to be quiet; detention there can sometimes last up to an
hour. she stated that before the events depicted on the video, cc and ac were
trying to put bb in time-out, but bb resisted. eventually, bb calmed down, went
downstairs, but later returned “on the warpath.”
cc
confirmed that after the offence, bb was assessed by a behavioral pediatrician
for possible bipolar disorder.  those evaluations started in august 2024 and
continued into mid-september.  when the incident occurred, bb was taking 0.5 mg
of risperidone up to four times daily. cc explained that administering
medication depends on bb’s mood. she noted bb becomes dangerous when
sleep-deprived or if off his medication for several days.
cc
described bb’s history of violence toward his siblings.  he gave his five-year-old
brother a bloody nose, he punched his sister in the head, threatened to kill
her, and kicked her.
at
school, bb’s behavior is worse than at home. she stated that in his last academic
year, bb was suspended 12 times for violent behavior; this year, as of november
when she testified, bb has already been suspended four times. she stated that one
incident involved bb dragging a girl by her head and smashing her head into
concrete after she insulted him. she complained that the school board responds
with immediate suspensions but does not offer behavioral support. she stated
that bb has now started running away from school, and she expressed frustration
that the school has no plan to manage him.
cc
stated that she was seeking help through the phoenix centre for counseling, and
she maintains regular appointments with the behavioral pediatrician and family
doctor. bb’s medication is being adjusted frequently as his weight increases. his
current risperidone dosage has been adjusted to two pills five times daily and he
is also prescribed ritalin for adhd. despite this, there are still days when bb
refuses medication and struggles to control himself.
cc
stated that advice on restraining bb varies depending on the source. police
told her to physically restrain bb when necessary. cc described an incident
where an officer stood by “useless” while bb was demolishing the house, calling
the situation “absolute insanity.” bb was breaking pictures, throwing items off
the wall, overturning furniture such as his little brother’s highchair, and
spilling things. when cc asked about the degree of force required, police
advised her to physically restrain bb.
cc
stated that bb’s behavior on the day in question is consistent with how he has
behaved in the past:  he tries to escape when he anticipates discipline. cc
compared this to her own childhood reactions. cc suggested bb may have simply
“woken up on the wrong side of the bed.”
when
asked if she would take the same action again in a similar scenario, cc
responded, “absolutely.”
questions of cc from the court
i
asked cc for some additional background details.  she stated that she does not
work outside the home. she holds a bachelor’s degree in criminology and a
diploma in addictions counseling. cc and ac have been married for seven years.
they are physically separated due to a court order related to this case. cc
hopes to reconcile after the case concludes, noting that the children want
their father back home. fcs has never apprehended bb and is no longer involved
with the family.
evidence of ac in-chief
ac
testified in his own defence.
ac
was just shy of his 39
th
birthday when he testified.  he is a member
of the canadian armed forces where he works as a flight engineer and
instructor.  he has 15 years of service.
ac
stated he has a vivid recollection of the events of april 2, 2024, because he
was removed from his home a couple of weeks later and he has replayed the
incident in his mind ever since. he described the entire day with bb as
volatile.  it escalated around 5:00 p.m.
before
the incident, ac was sitting on the couch just off camera, playing xbox. bb had
been hanging out in the basement, where there is another tv. bb was placed in
time-out by ac and cc but came out shortly afterward. at that point, ac saw bb
throw an object from the counter at l’s chair.
ac
intended to intervene immediately, but cc said she had the situation under
control. bb then ran to the knife drawer, said, “i am going to kill all of
you,”.  he then dropped the knife. cc managed to grab bb’s hands, but not
before bb struck her.
ac
got up when bb jerked cc. ac thought bb was trying to reach for the knives
again and feared cc might get hurt. ac stated, “if someone in the house is
going to get injured, it might as well be me, not the mother of four kids.” he
said he was concerned for everyone’s safety. ac grabbed bb’s hands, holding
them out in front of him, and tried to get bb to stand up. bb lunged forward,
ended up on his side, and ac attempted to grab bb’s lower body while bb kicked
his legs to break free.
afterward,
when cc had bb’s medication ready, ac stood bb up, and cc administered the
medication. bb was then ushered by both ac and cc to his time-out spot on the
staircase near the garage door. ac estimated bb stayed in time-out for at least
a couple of minutes. later that evening, bb returned downstairs to play. ac
explained the household rule: bb must speak calmly to leave time-out;
otherwise, he returns to the spot. once bb felt calm, he came to talk, and ac
tucked him into bed.
following
the incident, ac and cc discussed sending bb away temporarily to give bb and
his siblings a break. with a four-month-old baby and limited sleep, they
arranged for bb to stay with ac’s parents in toronto for about a week and a
half. ac and cc dropped bb off together, and ac later picked him up. when they
returned home, police were waiting. ac said an officer met him as they pulled
in and began questioning him while bb sat upstairs with another officer. ac confirmed
bb interacted with police but did not discuss the event.
ac
explained why only a certain sequence of the video was recorded. the camera
system has a small hard drive and cannot store continuous footage for an entire
week. it is set to record only events, which causes gaps in the footage. ac
noted that the system is not ideal and mentioned that they had a similar issue
during a previous car theft from their driveway. he stated that if the system
had captured everything, it would have shown bb throwing an object at l’s
chair, ac picking bb up and standing near the pantry, cc arriving with bb’s
medication, and bb being taken to his time-out spot.
ac
confirmed cc’s testimony with respect to the help that they have sought in
controlling bb’s behaviour.  he added that their family doctor also initiated a
referral to canada kids in kanata for behavioral support and medication
adjustments.
ac
emphasized that his goal during the incident was to remove bb from the area and
wait for cc to administer medication. he stated that he did not lose his
temper, though he was upset and worried. when asked why he intervened after cc
said she had control, ac explained that he feared cc might get hurt, especially
given her fragile mental state following the birth of their child.
ac
expressed his belief that bb could have followed through on his threat with the
knife and confirmed he was equally concerned for the safety of the other
children in the room.
when
asked if he could have acted differently, ac said he could have stayed seated
and let cc handle the situation, but it appeared she needed help. he noted that
the medication was stored in a high cabinet, and he was unsure what bb might
have done if cc had turned her back to retrieve it. ac stated that his primary
focus was ensuring bb received his medication and preventing harm.
finally,
ac acknowledged that he was under a peace bond at the time but believed his
actions were not wrong. he stated that he acted to stop bb from hurting people.
cross-examination of ac
ac
stated that he was seriously concerned bb might have had the knife in his hand
or could access it again. he explained that he thought bb was pulling cc toward
the area where knives were kept. when asked why he did not react when bb
initially took the knife from the drawer, ac said cc told him she had the
situation under control. ac agreed that even after bb struck cc in the face, he
did not intervene immediately because he believed cc could manage the
situation.
ac
admitted he does not recall cc’s first reaction or bb’s initial reaction but
agreed bb’s behavior did not change significantly from these other incidents.
crown
counsel questioned ac’s claim of having a vivid recollection, pointing out that
he could not recall the object bb threw or the nature of bb’s anger when he
came upstairs shouting. ac conceded these details were unclear.
crown
counsel highlighted the fact that when ac approached bb, bb pulled in the
opposite direction, and cc was between ac and bb. ac agreed that he placed his
hands on cc’s shoulders and moved her aside, stating he did so gently and
without intent to cause injury. ac explained that he wanted to help cc and
believed the situation was escalating. he said he initially respected cc’s wish
for him to stay out of it but felt it was the appropriate time to intervene.
ac
admitted that he did not know bb’s exact intention when pulling away, but he
did not want to take chances. he agreed bb often resisted taking medication but
said he did not understand why bb would pull away from the time-out spot or
medication. crown counsel suggested to ac that he “snapped” and decided to take
control.  ac disagreed with the term “snapped,” but agreed that he wanted to
resolve the situation. ac again reiterated that his initial thought was bb was
attempting to get a knife and he acted to prevent anyone from getting hurt.
ac
confirmed he was trying to restrain bb and move him to a safer area. he
acknowledged there was a struggle but said his goal was to separate bb and
maintain control. ac agreed that bb could have broken a window or caused other
harm and stated he acted to prevent such outcomes.
defence submissions
defence
counsel described the family’s situation as highly unusual and emphasized that
both parents have made significant efforts to obtain assistance for bb’s
behavioral issues. counsel noted that bb was on medication at the time of the
incident, but the dosage was insufficient to control his unpredictable and
assaultive behavior. since then, adjustments to medication and dosage have improved
the situation, though the process remains ongoing.
defence
counsel submitted that during the incident: bb was out of control; he had
threatened to kill everyone, retrieved a knife and made a slashing gesture, and
he threw an object at l. defence argued that both parents reacted differently
but were aligned in their overall approach:  attempting to talk to bb, enforce
time-outs, and administer medication.
cc
managed to control the knife aspect of the situation despite being under
extreme stress, postpartum, and caring for multiple children. counsel
acknowledged that gaps in cc’s memory is understandable given her
circumstances.
defence
counsel stressed bb’s history of violent behavior and his demonstrated
propensity for aggression, noting that he is capable of serious harm. he
maintained that the video evidence only captured 38 seconds of the event and
does not reflect the full context. he argued that this is not a family trying
to be violent, but rather parents developing coping mechanisms in the absence
of systemic support. the disconnect between their actions was based on their
subjective perceptions during a chaotic moment.
defence
counsel submitted that ac did not act with criminal intent. his actions were
those of a parent with no assistance from authorities, acting to prevent harm.
defence
referenced prior advice from police, who told the family to do what was
necessary to prevent an assault. counsel questioned why, if ac’s conduct were
criminal, the family subsequently implemented a safety plan, sought help from
relatives, and pursued healthcare interventions.
at
the court’s reminder, defence counsel also relied on the defence of correction
in
section 43
of the
criminal code
.
he stated that ac’s actions were
clearly to defuse the situation.
crown submissions
crown
counsel argued that i should reject any notion of self defence or defence of
other.  he reminded me that cc essentially told ac, “i’ve got this” and never
changed those instructions.
crown
counsel also noted that the video clearly shows cc acting in a manner as to
protect bb from the approach of ac.
analysis
the legal
framework against which the evidence in this case is applied
as an accused person, ac is presumed innocent
until the crown proves his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
only when the crown proves that ac committed the
elements of the offence charged beyond a reasonable doubt, is the presumption
of innocence overcome.
a
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched or frivolous doubt.  it is
not a doubt based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone.  it is a doubt
that is based on reason and common sense.  it is a doubt that logically arises
from the evidence or the absence of evidence.
to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, i
have to be sure with respect to ac’s guilt.  if i am not sure, i must find ac
not guilty.
if i don’t know who to believe, i must find ac
not guilty.  even if i believe that ac probably committed the offence, that is
not a sufficient basis on which to find ac guilty.  probable guilt is not proof
of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
the appellate authorities set out the path i
must follow in considering whether the crown has established guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt:
a)
first, if i believe the exculpatory evidence, i must find ac not
guilty.
b)
second, even though i do not believe the exculpatory evidence, if i
am left with a reasonable doubt by it, i must find ac not guilty.
c)
third, even if i do not believe the exculpatory evidence and am not
left in doubt by it, if i am left with a reasonable doubt on the basis of the
other evidence i do accept, i must also find ac no guilty.
only if, at
the end of this exercise, i am satisfied as to the guilt of ac beyond a
reasonable doubt, must i find him guilty.
i cannot compare the accounts and decide guilt based
on which account i like better.
in following this path, i rely on my experience,
reason and common sense.  i must not, however, engage in stereotypical or
mythological reasoning which masquerades as “common sense”.
the evidence that is led before me is assessed
by me on the basis of whether it is credible and reliable.  evidence must be
both credible and reliable.
a witness who is credible, is not necessarily
reliable.  a witness may be sincere and credible, but their evidence may also
demonstrate that their recollections are not reliable.
the same issue can arise where a witness “fills
in the blanks” with respect to what took place.  a witness may honestly and
sincerely believe that a certain aspect of their evidence is true; analysis rooted
in logic, reason and common sense might suggest however, that what the witness
says – as honest, sincere and credible as the witness may seem – is not
reliable.
memories fade.  they can also be faulty and
frail.  sincere, honest and credible witnesses can simply be wrong or make
assumptions about things because of the passage of time.
the law with respect to
common assault
in
order to find ac guilty of assaulting bb, crown counsel must prove each of the
following essential elements of assault beyond a reasonable doubt:
a)
that ac
intentionally applied force to bb;
b)
that bb did not
consent to the force that ac applied; and
c)
that ac knew
that bb did not consent to force that ac applied.
i
have little difficulty concluding that ac intentionally applied the force.
the
question of “deemed consent” is trickier.
with
respect to the issue of consent, in
r. v. a.e.,
2000 canlii 16823
(ont.
c.a.), justice weiler of our court of appeal noted that in certain
circumstances, a child is deemed to have consented to force applied by a
parent, subject to the following limits:
a)
the common law
recognizes the right of a parent to apply force
in a reasonable manner
for the benefit of the child (at paragraph 26);
b)
children may be
uniquely vulnerable to the quality of care and the decisions made on their
behalf by their parents (at paragraph 28);
c)
“…the law must
protect children and those who are defenceless from unwarranted bodily
interference” (at paragraph 29);
d)
“…on the other
hand, persons engaged in looking after a child must be protected from state
interference when acting in the best interests of the child.” (also at
paragraph 29);
e)
the deemed
consent of the child is a “narrow exception” that is “strictly limited to
conduct which is consistent with the purpose and rationale underlying the
policy basis for the consent….  …the force used must have been for the purpose
of caring for the child.”  (at paragraph 33);
f)
“…deemed
consent will not apply where the force is excessive” (at paragraph 37);
g)
the deemed consent
of a child is limited to “the customary norms of parenting or what a reasonable
parent would do in similar circumstances.  this is an objective standard.”  (at
paragraph 40).  for greater certainty, justice weiler noted that “[w]here the
amount of force clearly exceeds what is reasonable in the circumstances or is clearly
beyond the ordinary norm of parental conduct, the defence of deemed consent
will not apply (at paragraph 42);
h)
“… a parent has
the right to apply force to a child when it is necessary to protect the child,
to protect others (such as a younger sibling), and to teach a child social
values and behavioural limits.”  (also at paragraph 40);
i)
this
defence “dovetails” with section 43 (defence of use of force for correction)
(at paragraph 41).
despite
the passage of time,
ae
continues to be good law.  see, for example,
r.
v. bw,
2016 onca 96
.
commenting
on
ae,
and the later case of
r. v. palombi,
2007 onca 486
,
professor stewart offered this helpful restatement of the law of deemed consent
as it relates to children:
parents
and other caregivers (including teachers) are justified in applying reasonable
force to children under their care for the purpose of carrying out their duties
to the children, including providing the children with the necessaries of life,
caring for the children, providing the children with medical treatment and
care, protecting the children from danger, enforcing the rules of the home or
the school, preventing and responding to inappropriate behaviour by the
children, and demonstrating appropriate limits on behaviour.  the force used
must not be excessive to the purpose; moreover, the defence of deemed consent
does not justify the intentional infliction of harm, degrading treatment, or
actions taken in anger.  the justification for the use of force is assessed
from the perspective of the reasonable parent in the circumstances.
(see
hamish stewart, parents, children, and the law of assault,
2009 32-1
dalhousie law journal
1,
2009 canliidocs 494
at page 25)
i
will apply the law as it relates to “deemed consent” to the facts as i find
them below.
the law with respect to the
defence of “correction” in
section 43
of the
criminal code
section
43
of the
criminal code
states:
every schoolteacher, parent or person standing in the place
of a parent is justified in using force by way of correction toward a pupil or
child, as the case may be, who is under his care, if the force does not exceed
what is reasonable under the circumstances.
in
canadian
foundation v. canada,
2004 scc 4
, the majority of the supreme court of
canada found that this section was constitutional and did not offend the rights
of children.  in doing so, at paragraphs 24, 25, 30, 35, 37, 40, 46, 51, 60 and
62, the court interpreted the section in the following way:
a)
the person applying the force must have intended it to be
for “educative or corrective purposes”.
b)
the section does not save “outbursts of violence motivated
by anger or animated by frustration.”  “[o]nly sober, reasoned uses of force
are permitted.”
c)
the use of force must “address the actual behaviour of the
child”.
d)
the use of force must be “designed to restrain, control or
express some symbolic disapproval” of the child’s behaviour.
e)
the purpose of the force must always be education or
discipline.
f)
“reasonable
force” does not except “conduct that causes harm or raises a reasonable
prospect of harm”.  it is limited to the mildest forms of assault.
g)
the gravity of
the child’s wrongdoing which is said to have led to the use of force is not
relevant.   the focus is on correction.
h)
corporal
punishment of children under two is harmful and is not reasonable.
i)
corporal
punishment of children with a disability is not corrective because the child
may be incapable of learning from the application of force.
j)
corporal
punishment of teenagers is harmful because it can “induce aggressive and
antisocial behaviour”.  it therefore is not reasonable.
k)
corporal
punishment involving the use of objects such as rulers and belts is physically
and emotionally harmful and is therefore not reasonable.
l)
corporal
punishment involving slaps or blows to the head is harmful and is therefore not
reasonable.
m)
“generally, s.43 exempts
from criminal sanction only minor corrective force of a transitory or trifling
nature.”
n)
“there may be
instances where a parent or a school teacher reasonably uses corrective force
to restrain or remove an adolescent from a particular situation.”
o)
the decision to
“declin[e] to bring the blunt hand of the criminal law down on minor
disciplinary contacts… reflects the resultant impact this would have on the
interest of the child and family and school relationships.”
p)
section 43 is
designed to avoid “expos[ing] the family to the incursion of state law
enforcement for every trivial slap or spanking.”
q)
“[w]ithout
section 43, canada’s broad assault law would criminalize force falling far
short of what we think of as corporal punishment, like placing an unwilling
child in a chair for a five-minute “time-out”.
in the 21 years
that have passed since the
canadian foundation
decision was released,
there have been widespread calls for the repeal of section 43.  in 2015, the
truth and reconciliation commission called for the repeal of section 43 (truth
and reconciliation commission call for action 6).  more recently, in december
2025, dr. benjamin roebuck, the federal ombudsperson for victims of crime,
submitted as follows to senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs:
the potential harm inflicted by
corporal punishment extends beyond immediate physical effects, impacting
children’s psychological and cognitive development. this contradicts the core
principles of children’s rights, as recognized by various international conventions,
including the united nations
convention on the rights of the child
. in
the 2004 canadian foundation decision, justices deschamps, binnie, and arbour
highlighted in their dissent opinion that
section 43
of the
criminal code
implies
that children are less worthy of protection and that this is a violation of
their equality rights under
section 15
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
.
nearly two decades later, the
law has not changed. by allowing corrective force, we undermine the crucial
concept of consent, which is increasingly emphasized in educational settings.
in schools, anti-bullying and sexual violence prevention programs share the
message that no child should be hit, kicked, or touched in a way that makes
them uncomfortable. as children learn more about their rights and bodily
autonomy, experiences of physical discipline violate the values children are
internalizing. we send mixed messages to children if we allow physical
punishment. furthermore, under the law, we recognize that except for some
particular circumstances such as in sports, adults cannot consent to physical
violence. it is assault. however, section 43 of the
criminal code
allows
parents, caregivers, and teachers to use
reasonable
force against a child for correction.
research
from well-known scholars in the field has found that corporal punishment can
have long-term psychological impacts (durrant & ensom, 2012). recent
studies have found that even punishment that does not leave a physical mark,
such as spanking, can significantly harm a child’s brain development. the act
may expose or threaten a child, which can have similar impacts on the brain as
severe maltreatment (cuartas et al., 2021).
children
may also experience adverse outcomes, including increased aggression, mental
health issues, and diminished cognitive abilities (heilmann et al., 2021;
gershoff & grogan-kaylor, 2016, as cited in durrant & kutcher, 2023).
if a parent uses physical punishment, but the child does not respond or change
their behaviour, the parent may increase the severity of the punishment, which
could result in physical abuse (durrant et al., 2017, as cited in durrant &
kutcher, 2023). studies have proven that corporal punishment does not
effectively correct a child’s behaviour, challenging its intended benefit
(heilmann et al., 2021).
see
study
of bill s-251: an act to repeal section 43 of the criminal code - canada.ca
it may well be
that the continuing efficacy of section 43 should be re-examined in light of
this new research.  chief justice mclachlin, the author of the majority decision
in
canadian foundation
noted at paragraphs
36 and 37
that “[d]etermining
what is “reasonable in the circumstances” in the case of child discipline is
also assisted by social consensus and expert evidence on what constitutes
reasonable corrective discipline.”  the chief justice also noted that her
interpretation was largely “[b]ased on the evidence currently before the court”
and “the significant areas of agreement among the experts on both sides of the
issue” (quoting from the trial decision at paragraph 17).
a full record on
the issue of the continuing efficacy of section 43 is not before me.  it will
have to be left to legislative action or another court on another day.
that is not to
say that the section and the decision in
canadian foundation
cannot be
applied flexibly and purposively.  every case turns on its particular facts.
in
r. v. bs,
2008
canlii 10389
(ont. s.c.j.), justice robertson was sitting on summary conviction
appeal in a case where a father restrained his 15-year-old daughter in the back
of his vehicle to keep her from seeing an undesirable boyfriend.  the trial
judge, citing section 43 and
canadian foundation
’s apparent prohibition
on the use of corrective force on teenagers, convicted and granted a
conditional discharge.  on appeal, justice robertson found that there can be an
“acceptable use of force to correct a child’s safety risk”.
her honour
further noted at paragraph 19:
he corrected her by applying
force in order to control or restrain his child so as to protect her from going
to an inappropriate party.  he used force to express “symbolic disapproval” of
her behaviour.  it was clear that she was not going to stop based on common
sense and discussion.  his parenting toolbox was empty.
with respect to
whether the child in
bs
was capable of “benefiting from the correction”,
justice robertson noted at paragraph 24,
the fact that a child will not
immediately respond to correction or that the benefit of the correction is not
directly visible does not mean that section 43 is inapplicable.  a positive
benefit or consequence of correction is not always immediately obvious in children.
likewise, since
canadian
foundation
trial judges have tempered the prohibition against “
outbursts of violence motivated by anger or animated by
frustration”.
in
r. v. hume,
2020 oncj 619
, justice clark commented as
follows with respect to a principal’s restraint of an unruly nine year old in a
schoolyard:
even
if there was a very human dimension of frustration, or even a form of anger
attached to some part of his overall actions, anger and correction are not
mutually exclusive concepts.  it is unrealistic to assume that parents and
educators may discipline children, whatever the nature of the infraction, in a
state of detached calm.  anger is part and parcel of correction.
as justice berg summed up
in
r. v. bender,
2023 oncj
569
at paragraph
9
, “the presence of strong emotion does not necessarily deny
an accused recourse to section 43.”
i will discuss
the application of section 43 to the facts of this case below.
the law with respect to
defence of person
ac claims that his
behaviour towards bb was to prevent bb from stabbing and killing cc or other
children.  this raises “defence of person” in
section 34
of the
criminal
code
.
defence of
person is based on the concepts of “self defence” and “defence of other”.  it
states:
34
(1)
a person is not guilty of an offence
if
(a)
they believe on reasonable grounds
that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of
force is being made against them or another person;
(b)
the act that constitutes the offence
is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other
person from that use or threat of force; and
(c)
the act committed is reasonable in
the circumstances.
(2)
in
determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the
court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other
parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:
(a)
the nature of the force or threat;
(b)
the extent to which the use of force
was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the
potential use of force;
(c)
the person’s role in the incident;
(d)
whether any party to the incident
used or threatened to use a weapon;
(e)
the size, age, gender and physical
capabilities of the parties to the incident;
(f)
the nature, duration and history of
any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use
or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;
(f.1)
any history of interaction or
communication between the parties to the incident;
(g)
the nature and proportionality of
the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and
(h)
whether the act committed was in
response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.
in
r. v.
khill,
2021 scc 37
, the supreme court interpreted section 34(1) as a focus
on “the catalyst” (section 34(1)(a)), “the motive” (section 34(1)(b)) and “the
response” (section 34(1)(c)).
with respect to
section 34(1)(a), “the catalyst”, the supreme court noted that the actions of
the accused are to be judged on the basis of a modified objective standard.
justice martin defined it this way at paragraph 57:
the
question is not therefore what the accused thought was reasonable based on
their characteristics and experiences, but rather what a reasonable person with
those relevant characteristics and experiences would perceive….
with respect to
section 34(1)(b), “the motive”, the supreme court noted at paragraph 59 that
the actions of the accused are judged on a subjective basis having regard to the
following:
the
second element of self‑defence considers the accused’s personal purpose
in committing the act that constitutes the offence. section 34(1)(b) requires
that the act be undertaken by the accused to defend or protect themselves or
others from the use or threat of force. this is a subjective inquiry which goes
to the root of self‑defence. if there is no defensive or protective
purpose, the rationale for the defence disappears.  the motive provision thus
ensures that the actions of the accused are not undertaken for the purpose of
vigilantism, vengeance or some other personal motivation.  [citations omitted].
with respect to
section 34(1)(c), “the response”, at paragraph 62, the supreme court stated
that the section:
…operates
to ensure that the law of self‑defence conforms to community norms of
conduct.  by grounding the law of self-defence in the conduct expected of
a reasonable person in the circumstances, an appropriate balance is achieved
between respecting the security of the person who acts and security of the
person acted upon. the law of self-defence might otherwise “encourage hot‑headedness
and unnecessary resorts to violent self‑help”. [citations omitted.]
with respect to
the interpretation of section 34(2), the supreme court noted that:
a)
reasonableness is measured according to
“the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act”. the
court must consider how the act happened and what role each person played.  it “modifies
the objective standard to take into account characteristics of the accused” (“including
size, age, gender, and physical capabilities”), and “certain experiences of the
accused, including the relationship and history of violence between the
parties.”
b)
the court must not “
simply slip into
the mind of the accused. the focus must remain on what a reasonable person
would have done in comparable circumstances and not what a particular accused
thought at the time.”
c)
“[t]he “relevant circumstances of the
accused” in s. 34(2) can also include any mistaken beliefs reasonably held
by the accused. if the court determines that the accused believed wrongly, but
on reasonable grounds, that force was being used or threatened against them
under s. 34(1)(a), that finding is relevant to the reasonableness inquiry
under s. 34(1)(c). however, while s. 34(1)(a) and (b) address the
belief and the subjective purpose of the accused, the reasonableness inquiry
under s. 34(1)(c) is primarily concerned with the reasonableness of the
accused’s
actions
, not their mental state.”
d)
“[t]he person’s role in the incident”
refers to the person’s conduct — such as actions, omissions and exercises of
judgment — during the course of the incident, from beginning to end, that is
relevant to whether the ultimate act was reasonable in the circumstances.”
the
findings of fact and the application of the rubric in w.(d.):
do i believe the exculpatory
evidence?
no.
ac testified that he was sitting on the couch playing with
his xbox.  he continued to do so when bb threatened to kill everyone, got a
knife, was involved in a struggle with cc which resulted in the knife being
removed from bb’s grasp, hit cc and was restrained by cc.  cc told him that she
had things under control.  he stated that once bb started pulling cc away from
the cabinet where bb’s medicine was kept and back toward the location of the
knives, he intervened.
in these circumstances, given ac’s relative inaction
through most of what transpired before bb started yanking cc, i do not believe
that his actions were based on the need to defend cc, or others in the house,
from bb to resorting to a knife.  rather, i believe that ac intervened out of
anger and frustration.  he also decided that it was necessary to restrain bb to
prevent further insolence and misbehaviour and have him go to his “time-out”
chair.
i further find, based on a reasoned and considered
acceptance of the video evidence, that by the time that ac arrived to the area
where bb was yanking cc, bb realized his father was coming and had turned to
cower near his mother, going so far as to go on the opposite side of his mother
and placing his mother between himself and ac.  in these circumstances, the
threat to the safety of cc and the family had passed.  it was not necessary for
ac to restrain bb to defend others.
ac also admitted
in cross-examination that by then his primary purpose had shifted to restraining
bb for the purpose of assisting cc to administer medication.
it is also clear
that following the medication being administered, bb was escorted to and remained
in his time-out chair.
ac’s evidence
with respect to it being better that he have a knife “buried” in him than have
it buried in the mother of the children was completely over the top and i do
not accept it.
am i left in a reasonable doubt
by the exculpatory evidence?
no.  based on a considered and reasoned acceptance of the
videotaped evidence, i am not left in doubt by the exculpatory evidence.
on
the basis of the evidence i do accept, am i left in a reasonable doubt?
yes and no.
i do not accept much of what cc had to say about her view
of ac’s reactions, her recantation with respect to the decision to report what
happened to the police, her hearsay evidence with respect to what she was told
by some unnamed police officer (who was not called to testify) about how violent
bb is and the need to restrain him any way she can.
i am skeptical about the lack of video evidence which
respect to what happened before and after the 38 seconds that were put in
evidence, evidence which cc, ac or both had exclusive control over.
i am skeptical with respect to her evidence about the involvement
of the school and fcs, all of which was also unsupported hearsay.
i find, however, that managing bb’s behaviour is a
significant challenge for cc and this family.  despite the lack of detailed independent
evidence about this, i find that bb has some mental health problems that are
difficult to manage.  i find that he needs medication to assist with that.
i agree with cc that, generally speaking, there are
insufficient resources to deal with children who have significant behavioural
and mental health problems in general and in renfrew county in particular.  i
agree that parents are often left to fend for themselves.
i also find that when the incident arose, it was difficult
for her to cope.  i accept that she had post-partem issues as a result of the
birth of her fourth child.  i also accept that she had been through some other trauma
which also affected her ability to cope.  i note that this matter was originally
scheduled to come on for trial on july 24, 2025 and the crown sought (and was
granted) an adjournment on the basis that cc was visiting her extended family
in the united states.  i find that without ac, she does not have a lot of
extended family support.
the simple reality is that cc needs ac to assist her with
the children.  she is between the veritable rock and hard-place and has chosen
ac because she simply cannot cope with the children on her own.  as i stated to
counsel during submissions, with some exceptions, it was clear to me from the
tenor of her evidence that cc was definitely on “team ac”.
i find that cc and ac were not, at the time of the
incident, equipped to cope with four children, one of whom had serious mental
health and behaviour issues.
as i outlined with respect to the first two branches, the
video evidence is a sufficient basis on which to find that when ac approached
cc and bb to intervene, bb de-escalated.  the video, and cc’s evidence about
what happened at that point in time, makes it clear that bb feared his father’s
intervention and changed from struggling with cc to being more compliant.
i accept cc’s evidence that she told ac she had the
situation under control and that she was annoyed at ac for intervening.  reflecting
on the “rock and hard-place” position that she was in, she felt bad for the
child that ac had intervened and she did not wish to get bb into trouble.  i
also find that it was her experience that bb’s behaviour escalated when she and
ac “tag-teamed” him.  from her vantage point, ac’s intervention was unwelcome
and unnecessary.
importantly, i find that she was trying to tell ac to stand
down, back away and let things get back under control.  although there is no
sound, the video evidence supports the proposition that even after ac moved her
out of the way, she remained engaged in the area and can be seen gesturing with
her arms and hands.
i note that this happened over a course of seconds.  i will
have more to say about that in a moment.
i find based on the video evidence, that by this time, ac
simply had enough.  he intervened not to protect his wife and the other
children from a serious assault by bb. rather he intervened to assist his wife
in restraining the child for the purpose of administering medication and
ultimately putting the child in a time-out.
i find, given that he did not stop and proceeded to move cc
out of the way and restrain bb, even though bb had retreated from him, that he
was also motivated by anger and frustration.  he continued to engage bb when the
situation changed, and he should have simply stood by to reinforce and support
cc.
i find that ac intended to apply force to bb, bb did not
consent to the application of force and that ac knew that bb was not
consenting.
the
impact of deemed consent
with respect to the issue of “deemed consent”, i find as
follows:
a)
the force was applied for the purpose
of providing bb with the necessaries of life, to wit, medication and to control
his behaviour;
b)
the force was applied for the purpose
of providing medical care to bb, i.e. his medication;
c)
the force was applied for the purpose of preventing and
responding to bb’s inappropriate behaviour;
d)
was the force reasonable in the circumstances or excessive?  this
is where i have the most difficulty.  ac did not set out to intentionally
inflict harm on bb.  the force that was applied was not degrading.  there was
no bodily harm.  the force applied was intended to restrain.  there is no
suggestion that ac hit bb or used objects to hit ac.  there is no evidence he
struck bb in the head.  the actions consisted of grabbing bb to get control of
him.  there were elements of anger and frustration involved, but not overtly
so.  while some reasonable parents in similar circumstances would have, as cc asked
ac to do, stand down and back away at that moment in time, others would have
proceeded exactly as ac did to obtain control of bb for the purpose of ensuring
he obtained his medication and proceeded to his time-out.
on balance, i am
satisfied that deemed consent is made out.
for this reason,
notwithstanding my findings with respect to the credibility of ac, i am unable
to find him guilty and he is entitled to an acquittal.
the impact of section 43
applying the
rubric set out above with respect to section 43, i find as follows:
a)
ac applied the
force for corrective purposes. it is clear that bb was capable of learning from
such correction, on the basis that when bb approached, he de-escalated, cowered
to cc and moved so that cc was between him and bb.  i am satisfied that the use
of force was necessary to restrain bb and remove him from a situation of non-compliance
with his medication and time-out towards compliance with medication and time-out.
“time-out” is recognized as a valid parenting tool.   it cannot, however, be
imposed if the child refuses to abide by it.
b)
while there may
have been elements of anger and frustration, following cases such as
bs
,
hume
and
bender
, ac’s and cc’s parental toolbox was empty.  i agree
that it is a matter of common sense that it is unreasonable to expect that to
avoid criminal liability, parental discipline must be emotionless and devoid of
natural reactions to what unfolds.  parents cannot be held to a standard of
perfection.  they are human.
c)
the use of force
was intended to address the actual behaviour of the child as it existed when ac
first started to intervene.  by the time ac was within grasp of bb, however, bb’s
behaviour had changed.  bb was cowering to cc and attempted to separate himself
from ac by placing cc in the middle.  it is clear to me that he feared what was
coming next. this happened, however, over the course of seconds.  as much as we
value sober and reasonable reflection, it is unreasonable to expect a parent to
pivot so quickly.  i repeat:  parents cannot be held to a standard of
perfection.
d)
the use of force
was designed to restrain and control the bb.  it was not intended to punish bb.
e)
the use of force
was intended for discipline in the sense of making bb mind, stop misbehaving,
take his medication and go to his time-out spot.
f)
the use of
force – at least that which is observable in the span of the 38 second video in
evidence --  was relatively mild.  there was no bodily harm or a reasonable
prospect of harm.  ac did not strike bb in the head.  ac did not use an object
such as a belt or a ruler.  he grabbed bb with his hands.   the use of force
was minor.   while acknowledging the broader questions that have arisen with
respect the long-term effects of physical discipline on children, i find that
it was transitory and trifling.
g)
from a policy
perspective, this is not a case that is deserving of the blunt hand of the
criminal law.
for all of these
reasons, i find that the accused is entitled to recourse to section 43 and thus
i would also acquit him on this basis.
the impact of section 34
i will deal with
this issue summarily.  i do not find that the accused would be entitled to
avail himself of the defence in section 34.  i cannot find that a reasonable
person with the accused’s experiences would have continued to anticipate a
threat to themselves or others.  in my view, recourse to this section was
completely eliminated when cc told ac that she had control of the situation,
and when bb stopped yanking cc and cowered.
as i also stated
in my review of ac’s evidence, i did not believe his evidence about this, nor
did it leave me in doubt.  i thought it was a completely “over the top”
justification.
conclusion
for all of these
reasons, ac is found not guilty.
postscript
in cases such as
this involving young children, who are at the mercy of their parents, the
situation is unsettling.
the family had
gone to the unusual step of installing video surveillance inside their house.
i am aware of the increasing popularity of video surveillance for a variety of
reasons, but it was odd in this case.  there was some vague reference to the
children having previously made untrue allegations as the reason for the video
installation.
as i indicated
in my judgment i was also skeptical of the reasons that there was only a 38
second portion of the video available.
the only truly
objective evidence i had with respect to what transpired was that 38 second
video.
the way that bb cowered
to his mother in the video was unsettling.  it may well be that this was simply
a natural response to seeing his father enter the arena and becoming aware that
his behaviour was about to be restrained.  it may also be an expression of fear
of something else more sinister that was to come.
i was told that
there had, at some point, been fcs involvement but that organization was no
longer in the picture.
i was told that
the family has had significant difficulties accessing mental health services
and supports for bb.
i considered
ordering ac to obey a common law peace bond preventing him from using physical
discipline on any of the children.  i reasoned against this because i do not
have the full picture of what was going on in this family.  i also reasoned
against this on the basis that i have found that cc is unable to cope without
help and there may well be situations in the future where ac will have to be
called upon to assist with bb and that assistance will involve physical
restraint.
in the final
analysis, i will send a copy of this judgment to fcs to determine what, if any,
further steps or investigations ought to be taken.
released:  december
11, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson