warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code
.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)   any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)   two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)   at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)   on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  offence
— (1)  every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of
justice
citation:
r. v. p.g.,
2025 oncj 683
date:
2025 12 22
court
file no.: sudbury 4011-998-24-40101868-00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
p. g.
before
justice leonard kim
heard
on june 9, 10, 12, 13, 24 and september 4, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 22
nd
, 2025
julie bourassa................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
jean jacques primeau ..................................................  counsel
for the defendant, p.g.
l. kim j.
general
overview:
the accused stands charged with three offences:
a.
sexual assault under section 271;
b.
sexual interference under section 151, and;
c.
invitation to sexual touching under
section 152
of the
criminal
code
.
the complainant is z.b., who was under the age of sixteen at the
material time. the trial was heard on june 9, 10, 12, 13, 24 and september 4,
2025. the crown adduced testimony from the complainant, 15-year-old z.b., and
her older half-brother, r.l. the accused, p.g., called n.l. (the complainant’s
mother), a.o. (the accused’s sister) and testified in his own defence.
the main issues in this case were focused on the issues of opportunity
and identity. the credibility and reliability of the witnesses form a central
component of my analysis.   on consent, the crown was permitted to have the
complainant testify by cctv with a support person and applied pursuant to
s.715
of the
criminal code
to have her video statement admitted for the truth of its
contents, as an exception to hearsay.
it is admitted that z.b. had disclosed these allegations at some point
in the spring of 2023, and that approximately a week and a half later, provided
her video statement to police on may 24, 2023. mr. primeau, on behalf of the
accused, had conceded the admissibility of this statement. after the
complainant adopted the contents of her statement during the crown’s examination
in chief, i formally ruled it admissible and acknowledged the statutory
pre-requisites in s.715.1(1) had been met.
the complainant described three distinct incidents of sexual touching
committed by the accused when she was,
“really young, between the ages six
to seven”, or “six to eight
”
estimated by her to be between 2015 to 2017.
the accused is believed
to be her mother’s former boyfriend, p.g.
the position of the parties
the first two incidents are alleged to have happened at her mother’s
place, while she was living primarily with her father but on a weekend visit to
her mother’s. the crown submits that the first incident consisted of the
accused holding the complainant’s hand directly on his penis while repeatedly
moving her hand up and down.
on a separate incident, placing his hand inside the frontal portion of
the complainant’s sweatpants, underneath her underwear and in her vagina while
moving his hand around.
the third incident is alleged to have happened at her mother’s cousin’s
residence where he placed his hand inside her pants, on top of her vagina and
then digitally penetrated her while moving his hand around. simultaneously, she
alleged that he held her hand on his penis and moved her hand in a motion while
the two of them were lying next to each other in bed.
she identified the accused to be in his immediate presence throughout
the course of access visits at her mother’s residence that spanned on each
occasion over a weekend.
the
accused submits that the sexual assaults, as alleged, did not happen.
alternatively, if the court accepts that the sexual assaults happened and that
a former boyfriend of the complainant’s mother had sexually assaulted the
complainant, he submits that the crown has failed to proven identity and
essentially disputes that he was the one who had sexually assaulted her. during
the material times, there were other male partners who had been dating the
complainant’s mother, and who may have committed these offences.
he
points to the physical identification evidence provided by the complainant, r.l.,
n.l. and a.o. in support of this argument with particular emphasis on his hair
style including its length and colour. he submits that the complainant is
therefore mistaken in who she remembers to be the person who sexually assaulted
her.
i
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused sexually assaulted the
complainant on each of the distinct occasions as described by her. i found her
to be a credible and reliable witness on the core essential elements of each
offence. as the trial progressed, the persuasive impact of the totality of the
evidence in favour of opportunity and identity strengthened with each witness,
in conjunction with the evidence presented by the accused. i will now attempt
to explain how i came to this conclusion in these reasons.
issues
the
core issues i must decide are:
a.
do
i believe the accused?
b.
if
not, am i left with a reasonable doubt by his evidence in consideration of the
totality of the evidence?
c.
even
if the accused’s evidence does not leave me with a reasonable doubt, having
considered the evidence that i do accept, am i satisfied the crown has proven
the offences beyond a reasonable doubt?
my
analysis of the evidence is not done in silos. i summarize many key aspects of
the witnesses’ evidence but if i omit certain portions in these reasons, it
does not mean that i did not carefully consider it. i have considered the
totality of the evidence upon application of the relevant legal principles.
i
will first address the issues of the access arrangements that were in place at
the material time and whether the accused had opportunities to commit these
offences.
the access arrangements with the mother
the
complainant and her brothers are part of a blended family. they share the same
mother but different fathers. since the age of four, her primary residence was
with her father and she had regular access visits with her biological mother,
n.l. it is when this living arrangement was in place that she alleges each of
the three incidents of sexual touching with the accused happened.
she
recalls that commencing around the age of four, continuing between the ages of
six to eight years old, these visits with her mother happened on a weekly or
bi-weekly basis until approximately the age of 10 or approximately the year
2019. each visit would take place over a weekend from friday to sunday. she
admitted during cross-examination that she could not remember if it was every
weekend or every other weekend.
her
half-brothers were either living with her mother or otherwise present within
the general home environment during those visits. one of those brothers was r.l.,
a witness for the crown in this trial.
the evolution of the relationship with n.l. from the
perspective of the accused
the
accused testified that he met the complainant in december 2017 or january 2018
at the bus depot in sudbury. at the time, he was homeless and struggling from
an addiction to substances, specifically speed and percocets. n.l. was with her
two older boys and invited the accused to stay at her place and use drugs with
her. he recalled that these older boys were present in the home every other
week and that one of the older boys went by
“r.l.”.
he
estimated that their relationship lasted for about a year and candidly admitted
that it was an unhealthy relationship, grounded in their common struggles with
drug addiction. he had attempted to separate himself from her at times
throughout their relationship.
at
the beginning of their relationship, for a period of approximately a month and
a half to two months, he stayed at her residence sporadically. during this
period, the complainant and her brother, joined the two older brothers and had access
visits with n.l., while the accused was present in their home. he remembered
the names of the two younger children who visited to have the names
“z.b.
and c.”
after
staying with n.l. for a month and a half to two months, he left for pembroke to
see his twin daughters who still resided with their biological mother, c.w.
after
two to eight weeks, he returned to sudbury and couch-surfed and stayed
primarily with his brother for a few months.
after
living with his brother in sudbury, he stayed at n.l.’s residence
“a few
other times” … “for a couple of weeks or a week”.
while
he stayed with n.l., he remembered visiting her second cousin’s home with her
two older boys and n.l. but never attended there with the complainant or c.
present.
in
june 2019, n.l. drove him to pembroke to see his twin girls for their third
birthday. their relationship came to an end when he hitchhiked to ottawa and
remained there throughout the summer of 2019.
other
than chance encounters in the community, he insists that he did not see the
complainant beyond the two access visits in early 2018, when he stayed at n.l.’s
home in sudbury.
i
will examine his evidence in more detail later in these reasons.
law and analysis
the
accused is presumed innocent, and the burden falls solely on the crown to prove
guilt at the high standard of beyond a reasonable doubt. it is not enough for
me to believe that he is probably or likely guilty. he chose to waive his right
to silence, and he testified in his own defence. he denied sexually assaulting
the complainant both during his evidence in chief and while cross-examined by
the crown. this requires me to assess his credibility in the context of the
totality of evidence in this trial.
in
assessing the evidence, i remind myself of the differences between credibility
and reliability.  credibility relates to the honesty or veracity of a witness.
specifically, whether the witness is expressing themselves truthfully to the
best of their abilities.
reliability
relates to the accuracy of the witness’ testimony. in determining this, i must
consider their ability to accurately observe, recall and recount the events in
issue.  a credible witness may give unreliable evidence. accordingly, there is
a distinction between a finding of credibility and proof beyond a reasonable
doubt.
as
it relates to child witnesses, i am mindful of the instructions by the supreme
court of canada in
r. v. b.g.,
1990 canlii 7308 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 30 at para.
48
:
“
…regarding the
credibility of child witnesses, it seems to me that he was simply suggesting
that the judiciary should take a commonsense approach when dealing with the
testimony of young children and not impose the same exacting standard on
[page55] them as it does on adults.
however, this is not to say that the courts should not carefully assess the
credibility of child witnesses and i do not read his reasons as suggesting that
the standard of proof must be lowered when dealing with children as the
appellants submit. rather, he was expressing concern that a flaw, such as a
contradiction, in a child's testimony should not be given the same effect as a
similar flaw in the testimony of an adult. i think his concern is well founded
and his comments entirely appropriate.
while children may not be able to
recount precise details and communicate the when and where of an event with
exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived
what happened to them and who did it.
in recent years we have adopted a much more benign
attitude to children's evidence, lessening the strict standards of oath taking
and corroboration, and i believe that this is a desirable development. the
credibility of every witness who testifies before the courts must, of course,
be carefully assessed but the standard of the "reasonable adult" is
not necessarily appropriate in assessing the credibility of young children.”
[emphasis added]
two
years after the release of
b.g.,
madame justice b. mclachlin [as she
then was] in
w.(r)
,
reminded us of two notable developments in the law affecting
the analysis of evidence from children.
the first was to remove any notion that the evidence of children was
inherently unreliable and must therefore be treated with special caution. as a
result of this change in the law, the requirement that a child's evidence be
corroborated has been removed from the
criminal code
. justice mclaughlin made
it clear at the end of paragraph 23 in
w.(r)
,
that
“…if a court
proceeds to discount a child's evidence automatically, without regard to the
circumstances of the particular case, it will have fallen into error.”
the second notable change in the law towards the evidence of
children was a clear understanding that it would be wrong to apply adult tests
in assessing credibility to the evidence of children
.
justice mclaughlin
goes on to explain that children may experience the world differently from
adults and that we should not be surprised that details important to adults
such as time and place may be missing from the memory of a child. trial judges
are instructed to take a common-sense approach and to not apply the same
exacting standard that we would with respect to adult witnesses. this was a
reiteration of the supreme court's decision in
b.g.
two years prior.
in
assessing the credibility of a witness, i am to consider any inconsistencies in
what a witness said at different times.  inconsistencies on minor matters or
matters of detail are normal and do not generally affect the credibility of a
witness. however, one or more inconsistencies involving material matters can
justify concluding that the witness is neither credible nor reliable.  in
determining this, it is necessary to look to the totality of the
inconsistencies.
the frequency and duration of contact with the
accused gradually increased opening the door to opportunity
the
frequency and duration of contact the accused had with n.l. and the complainant
gradually increased over a range of time. reconstructing this range of time is
a necessary exercise to determine whether the accused had the opportunity to
have access to the complainant and commit these offences. each witness called
by both sides spoke to the issue of opportunity which ultimately proved that
the accused had ample opportunity to commit these offences.
r.l.
is the complainant’s older half-brother and is 18 years old. he shares the same
mother with the complainant. the significance of his evidence was focused on
the issues of identity and opportunity. he explained that he lived with his
mother, the complainant, j. and c. in the same residence. he testified that he
stopped living with his mother at the age of 15, which would be approximately
the year 2022.
he
recalled his mother dated two men with the first name “shane”. the earlier
shane had moved in with his two daughters. later, the second shane whom his
mother dated just prior to the accused was described as
“…a little short”,
tanned skin with usually a small beard and moustache with hair
“pretty close to p.g.’s”.
after
this second shane moved out, his mother began dating the accused and he moved
in, whom he considered to be like a stepfather to them. according to r.l.,
prior to the accused moving in with them, the accused had visited his mother
for several weeks:
“for the first
little bit, he was seeing my mom and visiting, and then after – i would say a
few weeks to maybe, like, a month or two, he started staying with us.
”
r.l.
also agreed under cross-examination that his mother may have started to date
the accused in 2018, through to 2020. he also expressed that prior to 2018, his
mother and the accused were
“talking a little bit before that, before 2018,”
but he wasn’t sure.
this
gradual increase from a visitor to a housemate as characterized by r.l. paints
a broader picture of time the accused was present in n.l.’s home, and thus, an
expanded opportunity to sexually assault the complainant.
his
interaction with the accused was for a significant period of time and in no way
brief. the last time r.l. had seen the accused was in approximately 2020 when
his mother had taken him and his brother to pembroke to see him. while there, r.l.
stayed with the accused in pembroke for
“a month or two.”
n.l.
is the biological mother of the complainant. her memory required a great deal
of assistance from defence counsel who played portions of her video statement
to her in court. she explained during her testimony that she has progressively
struggled with her memory since her tumour had become active. she had surgery
and lost most of her memory and is slowly gaining it back as time goes on.
however,
even with these challenges, n.l. was able to remember relevant details and
respond well to the questions put to her by counsel. when she could not recall
certain facts, she readily admitted this to be the case.  despite some initial challenges
with respect to her memory, i found her to be a credible witness.
after
a portion of her initial video statement was played to her in court, she agreed
with mr. primeau that she started to
“see”
the accused in 2018,
approximately a week after the time her six-year-old nephew passed away.
it
was not clearly defined in her evidence what subjectively qualified as
“seeing”
in this line of questioning, but i am prepared to infer that this meant dating
on an ongoing basis to some consistent degree. the frequency as to how often
they saw each other was not explored in the stages leading up to the accused moving
in with n.l.
it
appears that their relationship initially began with some contact and then
gradually progressed to the point when he moved in with her. this is similar to
the nature of the relationship described by r.l.
n.l.
characterized their relationship this way:
“… i knew him
from years before. i hadn't seen him in several years. like, i mean back in my
teens. and then hadn't seen him in several years, started
seeing each
other shortly after my nephew passed away, and then eventually we ended up
together for a little bit.”
after
agreeing with mr. primeau that their relationship got more serious in 2018, n.l.
recalls that towards the end of the year in 2018, the accused moved in with
her. referencing throughout the year 2018, her response was as follows:
“he lived with me
for a little while, off and on. it was an off and on, so i can't - i don't know
exactly when, i just know it was - he lived with me for a little bit, then
disappeared for a while, then came back, then disappeared for awhile. it was an
off and on thing.”
at
the time he moved in, n.l.’s children were present in her home
“off and on”.
this included the complainant and r.l.. however, she was unable to say whether
the complainant was living with her at the end of 2018.
a.o.
is the sister of the accused. she provided general timelines as to when she
believed her brother was in a dating relationship with n.l.
from
2016 to the end of 2017 or early 2018, she had contact with her brother
regularly particularly around the time his twins were born in june of 2016. she
saw the accused as frequent as a couple times a month and at least every second
month. at the time, he was in a relationship with the mother of these twins, c.w.
she characterized this relationship to be
“on and off a couple of times.”
her
contact with her brother significantly diminished when the accused and his
family moved to pembroke, ontario, for approximately a year. during the time he
was in pembroke, a.o. estimated that she only saw the accused once every two
months, or as infrequent as once or twice a year.
to
the best of her knowledge, the accused and n.l. were
“kinda seeing each
other”
from approximately the beginning of 2018.  she also characterized
this relationship to be
“on and off”
and recalls meeting n.l. on a
single occasion in february 2018 and described her residence to be in new
sudbury off of [address removed].
when
he began dating n.l. in early 2018 upon his return from pembroke, she believed
him to be living on the streets and utilizing n.l.’s couch
“a few times.”
for the year 2018,
she was unable to provide a concrete answer as to
where the accused was actually lodging upon his return to sudbury and described
him to be
“couch surfing”
and struggling to find stable housing.
the
accused testified that he started
“seeing”
n.l. in late 2017 to early
2018. this was corroborated by his sister, a.o., who had knowledge as to where n.l.
lived because she drove by her place and met her in february 2018. on his own
evidence, the accused corroborated the complainant’s evidence and admits to
being present for two access visits the complainant had with her mother that
each happened on a friday to sunday.
furthermore,
the accused himself testified that the relationship ended around the third birthday
of his own children, being june 2019. it was around that time that n.l. drove
him to pembroke to celebrate the birthday of his children, and he later
hitchhiked to ottawa and remained there for the summer of that year. he then
returned to pembroke around late august to early september 2019 and remained
there for four and a half months. in january or february 2020, he returned to
sudbury.
he
testified that beyond june 2019, he did not spend any additional time at n.l.’s
residence when the complainant was there on an access visit. i accept this to
be accurate in consideration of the other evidence in this trial.
upon
careful review of the trial record, the totality of the testimony from each of
the witnesses points to the accused being in the presence of the complainant
beginning with occasional couch surfing to ultimately living at n.l.’s home for
significant periods of time.
as
it relates to opportunity, i am of the view that given the gradual nature of
the accused’s involvement in n.l.’s life, opportunities for him to sexually
assault the complainant spanned a broader time frame that extended earlier than
the commencement of a more stable dating relationship between him and n.l.
accordingly,
the testimony of the complainant, n.l., r.l., a.o. and the accused himself
collectively permit me to find beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was
physically present in n.l.’s home for several days at a time when the
complainant was in his company. i find that he had ample opportunity to
sexually assault the complainant between december 2017 to june 2019, when she
was 8 to 9 years of age.
what is the impact of the complainant’s inaccurate estimation
on the dates?
the
complainant alleged these incidents happened between the ages of six to eight
years old, which would translate to 2015 to 2017. between those years, her
mother may have dated the three other men, prior to dating the accused. to this
end, mr. primeau put to the complainant that her mother did not start dating
the accused until approximately 2018 to 2019 and then again in 2021. the
complainant disagreed and insisted that the accused was coming around their
house well prior to 2018 and that she had not confused the accused as one of
the two shanes between the period of 2015 to 2017.
on
the issue of dates, mr. primeau submitted to the court that the crown’s
application to amend the date on the information without any new evidence
elicited during the trial speaks to a weakness in the reliability of the
complainant’s testimony. in doing so, he did not object to the amendment itself
but points me to the timing that does not coincide with the years the accused
had dated n.l.
it
is undisputed that the amendment did not disturb the fact that at the time of
the allegations, the complainant was under 16 years old and that the amended
date of january 1, 2015 to december 31, 2019, captures the dates of these
allegations on counts 1, 3, and 5.
with
respect, i do not see the amendment of the information to be probative in my
analysis of the reliability and credibility of any witnesses in this trial.
there may be a vast array of reasons for this amendment. i cannot speculate as
to why the amendment was made and when. ultimately, the request to amend was
available to the crown to conform with the evidence at trial at any stage of
the proceedings.
put
another way, the crown had the statutory right pursuant to
section 601(2)
of
the
criminal code
to seek such an amendment of the particulars on the
information and i am unable to attach any weight to why and when it was
requested. this is a neutral factor that has little impact on my overall
assessment of the substantive evidence from all sources.
in
attempting to ascertain whether the accused had the opportunity to commit these
offences, i have considered the discrepancies in the time frames described by
the complainant and its impact on the reliability of her evidence. although
it’s clear to me she may be mistaken on dates, i am mindful of the instructions
by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. b.g.
,
1990 canlii 7308 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 30 at
para.
48
when it comes to child witnesses:
“
while children
may not be able to recount precise details and communicate the when and where
of an event with exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived
what happened to them and who did it.”
it is not surprising to me that the complainant, a
child likely eight to nine years old at the time, has inaccurately recalled the
dates regarding these allegations. however, this does not diminish her
credibility or reliability when i look to other aspects of the trial record
that assists me in understanding when the accused was present in n.l.’s home
with the complainant in his immediate presence.
i have cautioned myself on the risk of the complainant
misidentifying the accused as the perpetrator because she had described this
person to be her mother’s boyfriend when there were others before him, some
with similar identifying features.
in my view, the error in the dates
identified by the complainant does not translate to an error in her identification
of the accused because of the degree of interaction and familiarity she had
with the accused in combination with the identification evidence in totality.
she insisted that she believed these incidents happened to her prior to 2018
because her mother and the accused had been seeing each other on and off prior
to 2018. her recollection of the on and off nature of this relationship in late
2017 into 2018 is corroborated by every other witness in this trial.
in the mind of this child, i do not think it is
realistic for her to know with any degree of precision exactly when the initial
couch surfing by the accused in her mother’s home evolved into an intimate
partner relationship worthy of being characterized as “seeing” or “dating”.
these are things most knowledgeable to the adults involved and her perception
that the accused was her mother’s boyfriend must be looked at from her
perception as a young child with weekly or bi-weekly access visits with one of
those adults. in a close examination of the trial record, her perception on
dates, if inaccurate, has little impact on the reliability of her
identification of the accused and her detailed descriptions of the core sexual
touching she remembers.
the probative value of exhibit 3 – the photograph of
the accused with longer hair dated march 2023
on
consent, the crown filed a colour photo of the accused taken in march 2023
accessed from a police database (exhibit 3). i make no adverse inference in so
far as how this photo came into existence. this photo was taken likely within a
year of when the complainant had seen the accused in the donovan neighbourhood
holding a guitar.
its
probative value appears to be that it depicts the accused with significantly
longer hair on the sides and the top of his head in comparison to how he looks
in court today, and in the historical photo filed as exhibit 4 by the accused
that shows with short brown hair.
his
hair colour in the photo from march 2023 is brown, with hints of a lighter tint
to it. as indicated, the length of his hair is much longer on the sides, unkept
and wavy, with a portion covering his forehead, approximately an inch or so
above his eyebrow. he also has a thick brown beard.
when
a.o. was shown a photo of the accused in exhibit 3 (depicting long brown hair
and a long beard) she admitted that she had never seen him look similar to that
photo during the years 2016 to 2019.
during
cross-examination, she admitted that she has known him to have longer hair, but
it was usually cut short prior to her seeing him and in any case, not as long
as his hair shown in exhibit 3. in other words, the length of hair in this
photo was something that she had never seen before.
she
admitted that during those longer periods of time that she did not see the
accused, which included the period of time he was dating n.l. and when he was
struggling with homelessness, his hair could have grown much longer than she
had normally seen.
she conceded that these longer gaps in time were at least two months or longer
and that she once saw him with
“a little extra longer hair
” than what
she saw at the beginning of this trial but at a length not as long as exhibit
3. this was when she saw him playing his guitar outside of the superstore.
in
her examination in chief, a.o. was shown the photo in exhibit 4 that depicted
the accused with short, shaved hair on the sides and on top. she described the
accused’s hair as usually very short with an occasional beard as shown in
exhibit 4. she testified that his hair was never longer than what she had
observed in court in the first two days of this trial a couple of weeks prior.
as
for hair colour, a.o.  provided a detailed account of the accused’s hair
changing colour or tones over the years since his childhood through to
adulthood. when the accused was little, she described his hair to be platinum
blonde or very light brown and transition to a darker tone as he grew older,
but still brown.
in
a genuine effort to describe his hair colour, she referenced the french term,
“chatain”,
and explained this term to mean
“dark blonde or light brown colour.”
during
cross-examination, she maintained that his hair colour remained the same
throughout the years from 2016 up to the first days of trial in mid-june 2025.
she
agreed with the crown that this type of hair has undertones that are more
noticeable in various shades of light, dependent upon the lighting present or
the way in which the hair is styled.
i
find a.o.’s testimony on the colour and length of her brother’s hair during the
time period encompassing december 2017 to june 2019 to be unreliable. part of
my conclusion is based on the factual reality that the accused’s hair would
have grown and changed during this span of time and during extended periods she
did not see him. her recollection of the accused’s hair colour and length is
interrupted by several weeks and months when she conceded the accused was
homeless, couch surfing and in sporadic contact with her. while i sensed her to
be well intentioned, the fact of the matter is that she had sporadic contact
with the accused and would not be in a position to comment on his physical
features in any reliable way. accordingly, i place no weight to her evidence as
it relates to the accused’s hair colour, style or and length during the
material times between december 17 to june 2019.
the probative value of the photo of the accused with
short hair in exhibit 4
n.l.
was shown exhibit 4, at the time it was a lettered exhibit, yet to be
qualified. this is the photo depicting the accused with short hair on the side
and top of his head and was provided by n.l. to officer hutton. she testified
that she provided this photo to police and it was taken at [address removed] in
sudbury, by her friend.
this
photo of the accused depicts him with short hair on the side and on top. she
insisted that it was taken when she was living in an apartment on [address
removed] after 2019, likely in the year 2020 or later.
n.l.
was unable to recall the precise date as to when this photo was taken but she
repeatedly insisted that it was taken much later than 2018 when she did not
have care of any of her children.
she
also rejected any notion that the accused looked similar to his appearance in
this photo put to her by defence counsel.
when
asked if the accused looked similar to the photo in exhibit 4 when they dated
in 2018, n.l. disagreed and described the accused to have long, blonde curly
hair that he shaved from time to time.
according to n.l., every time she had seen the accused’s hair, she described it
to be
“either blondish…dirty blonde…maybe slightly on the reddish side, but
more blonde”.
she
insisted that the main thing she could recall was that the accused’s hair was
predominantly long and curly and that when this was the case, he also had a
long beard. in the witness box, she touched the right side of her face and
chin, as a way of demonstrating to us the length of the accused’s hair when it
was not shaved. she also explained that his hair
“looked different in
different months, different weeks”
and that he
“looked different a lot.”
n.l.
testified that she provided additional photos of the accused to officer hutton
that portrayed the accused with curly blond hair, and another photo with him
wearing glasses. in her mind, the accused looked very different in each photo
and insisted:
“you wouldn’t tell it was the same person.”
the accused’s hair during the first two days of trial
in
response to questioning by counsel, reference was made by r.l. to the accused’s
current hair length in court on the first two days of evidence. to better
understand the responses to these questions, i made explicit observations
during the cross-examination of the complainant and testimony of r.l. with the
approval of counsel. i observed in court the accused’s hair to be short on the
sides. on the top, his hair was longer, and combed forwards with a darker shade
of brown.”
the accused’s testimony on opportunity and
identification
on
his own evidence, there was ample opportunity to sexually assault the
complainant. those opportunities are crystallized when i consider the combined
evidence of the other witnesses. in total, the accused estimated that in 2018,
he was at n.l.’s home on four separate occasions, with each occasion spanning
approximately two to three weeks in duration.
he
admitted to being in the presence of the complainant on two occasions during
two access visits she had with n.l. generally on weekends from friday to sunday
on two separate occasions at n.l.’s residence.
as
it relates to the alleged sexual assaults, the accused rejected any notion that
he touched the complainant sexually anywhere on her body on each of the three
occasions alleged by the complainant.
initially,
and prior to the accused’s drug addiction reaching a more severe level, n.l.
described him to be good with her children. she had no concerns with him being
in their presence and testified that he was also present when the children,
including the complainant, were put to bed. for example, n.l. remembers the
accused taking turns with her to tuck the children into bed at the time he
lived with them.
the
accused admitted to being alone with the two older boys on a number of
occasions but testified that he never let n.l. leave him alone with the younger
children. he denied ever being left alone with the complainant at any point and
also denied ever putting the children to bed. he testified that n.l. was
always
with him when the complainant and her younger brother were present.
he
could not recall a memory of having a conversation with the complainant and
described her as someone who didn’t talk much. however, he conceded that it was
possible that he spoke to her more than what he could recall.
the
accused referenced exhibit 4, a photo of him with shorter hair, as a general
representation of what his hair usually looked like during the years that he
had stayed with n.l. at her home from late 2017 into early 2018.
he
claims that during these material times, his hair usually was not quite as long
as it was at the commencement of this trial and described his hair to be dirty
blonde or dark brown in colour.  he acknowledged his hair to be quite long with
a beard in exhibit 3. however, he insisted that his hair was not this long at
any point he was in contact with n.l. and the complainant. during
cross-examination, he estimated the frequency of haircuts at the time he was
dating n.l. to be at least once every two months and that he never had wavy
hair. he also testified that prior to the commencement of this trial, he did
not cut his hair for approximately three to four months prior.
he
corroborated r.l.’s testimony as it relates to a conversation the two had
regarding his hand tattoo of a cracker that r.l. had perceived to be a piece of
cheese.
from the witness box, he displayed several tattoos to the court on his arms,
legs and hands. in doing so, he had to lift his arm sleeves and pant legs to
reveal some of these tattoos, all of which were in place prior to meeting n.l.
and her children.
the accused testified
that he was in elliot lake in 2022 but was on bail from charges that originated
in sudbury. he does not recall being in sudbury in 2022, when the complainant
claims to have seen him in the donovan neighbourhood. however, he conceded that
his recollection of the years are
“a bit of a blur,”
but believes he
left sudbury for elliot lake when he was 33 years old, approximately 4 years
ago in 2021 and returned in 2023, upon arrest for these charges.
the accused
testified that he used mostly speed and percocets during the years he had come
into contact with n.l. and her children and began using fentanyl more
frequently in 2023 prior to his arrest.
he admitted
during cross-examination that his drug use gradually increased through the
years 2013 to 2017. he went from using drugs once or twice a week to daily in
2017. when he was dating n.l. in late 2017 to early 2018, he confirms that he
was using drugs everyday but not in the presence of her children. his entire
income was being used to support his drug addiction and he struggled with
homelessness.
despite this, he
insists that his memory of these events today is accurate. to the extent that
his memory is impacted, it is due to recent fentanyl use and focused on his
short-term memory only.
the law of recognition identification evidence
eyewitness
evidence must be approached with caution because of its potential to be
unreliable from otherwise credible, well-meaning witnesses.
here, the
descriptions in support of identity as provided by the complainant is more
accurately considered to be recognition evidence because she was testifying to
someone whom she knew or was familiar with, as opposed to a stranger.
recognition
evidence is considered more reliable and generally carry more weight than
eyewitness identification of a person whom the witness is previously
unacquainted.
however, it is
important to not lose sight of the risks associated with identification
evidence, even in instances of recognition evidence. as the court of appeal
stated in
olliffe
,
i must be vigilant to ensure the reliability of any proposed recognition
evidence is sufficiently reliable and assess the circumstances in support of
such identification evidence. i quote:
“triers of fact are
entitled to take into account whether the witness is acquainted with the
accused when assessing the reliability of the identification evidence. where a
witness is known to the accused, the testimony identifying the accused is
sometimes referred to as recognition evidence.
the level of familiarity between the accused and the
witness may serve to enhance the reliability of the evidence. it must be
remembered, however, that recognition evidence is merely a form of
identification evidence. the same concerns apply and the same caution must be
taken in considering its reliability as in dealing with any other
identification evidence....”
in other words,
recognition evidence is still prone to the same frailties and the same risks as
identification evidence and must be approached with the same level of caution
and requires the same level of reliability before i can accept it.
even where the
witness knows the person being identified, the time to observe, the
circumstances of the observation and the conflicting evidence are important
factors i must consider in order to determine the reliability of the
recognition evidence.
the more
prolonged the previous opportunity the witness had to become acquainted with
the person’s appearance, the more reliable and corresponding weight may be
attached to the recognition evidence.
the greater the familiarity a witness has with the person, the less
elaboration on any points of distinctiveness may be required. it is a commonsense
observation that with the passage of time, many people may not take explicit
note of the same features that strangers might.
as i consider
these legal principles, i now turn to the extent of the interaction as
described by the complainant in each of the three alleged incidents of sexual
touching.
incident 1 (count 5 – invitation to sexual touching,
contrary to
s. 152
)
the complainant
explained that her mother, along with her brothers, r.l. and
j.,
had
gone with her to a splash pad near her mother’s home. she does not recall
whether the accused joined them on this excursion. upon returning home that
evening, her mother had taken the boys to a corner store to get some chips and
candy, in anticipation of a family movie night. she explained that this corner
store is not there anymore and is a home.
she recalled
being left alone with the accused at her mother’s home and estimates that at
some point in the early evening, perhaps between the hours of 12 to 3:00 p.m.,
she was getting changed out of her bathing suit in her room.
when she had her
bathing suit removed, the accused came into the room and told her he needed to
tell her something. she followed the accused into her mother’s bedroom and
after 5 to 10 minutes had passed, the accused removed his clothes while she was
seated on the bed. he lied down on the bed on his back and grabbed her hand and
held it around his penis, utilizing her hand to stroke his penis in an up and
down motion. in her words,
“he held my hand and made me touch it.”
(pg.
45)
the accused made
sounds that she was unable to explain to the officer. she agreed with the
officer that he was breathing heavily. she described the action he made her do
this way in her video statement:
“
he made me hold it the whole time. like he – he had
his hand on my hand the whole time
.” (pg. 46)
she described
how it ended,
“he took his hand off of mine and i moved my hand off.”
when asked by the officer if something came out of his body she had never seen
before, she was unable to recall. the accused got dressed and assisted her in
getting dressed prior to her mother and siblings returning home. although the
accused had initially told her that he had to discuss something with her, no
such discussions took place.
incident 2 (pg. 52) – count 3 – sexual interference
contrary to s.151
the second
incident is alleged to have happened in the complainant’s room at her mother’s
home subsequent to the first incident. the complainant testified that her
mother and siblings, c., r.l. and j. were all downstairs while she was alone
with the accused. she recalls they both had their clothes on.
he allegedly
said to the complainant he needed to talk to her. after a brief discussion, he
slowly approached her and placed his hand inside the frontal portion of her
sweatpants and started to move it around. he touched her vagina underneath her
underwear and in her vagina. i have reproduced this portion from pg. 52-53 of
the video transcript:
“z.b.: he put his hand in my pants and started moving
his hand.
detective: so was that the front of your pants, the
back of your pants, or something else?
z.b.: the front of my pants.
detective: and was it under your underwear, or on top
of your underwear, or something else?
z.b.:  underneath.
detective: and what part of your body was he touching?
z.b.: my vagina
detective: and was it on top? was it...
z.b.:  it was...
detective: ...it....
z.b.: …in.
detective: okay. and was he using
words, or making noises this time?
z.b.: no.”
the complainant
described being seated on the edge of her bed while the accused was seated
directly beside her. this incident of touching ended when one of her brothers
unexpectedly walked into her bedroom. the accused kept his hand inside her
pants, but stopped moving his hand around when her brother walked in.
the accused then
told her brother that they would be downstairs in a minute. her brother then
left the bedroom and went downstairs. after her brother left the room, the
accused removed his hand from her pants and they both joined her brother downstairs.
she does not remember which brother entered the room during this incident but
recalls that the accused didn’t speak much to her afterwards and was
“quiet”
for the remainder of the day.
she described
her sweatpants to be baggier in style and that there was no blanket or sheet
covering the accused’s hand inside her sweatpants.
z.b. does not
remember how old she was when this second incident happened. however, she
estimates that this incident happened during the subsequent visit to her
mother’s house after the first incident. she had previously estimated the first
incident happened when she was six or seven and was unsure if this second
incident happened the same year or the following year. the best she could say
with respect to the date was that it was in the general range of time after the
first incident.
incident 3 (pg. 58) – count #1 – sexual assault
contrary to s.271
the third
incident allegedly happened at the residence of her mother’s second cousin when
she was between six to eight years old. this relative had three children, and
one of them, a son, had passed away. she had visited this relative’s home prior
to meeting the accused and believes that he had also been there without her
present on a separate occasion.
this residence
was near the walmart [address removed] in sudbury. during a visit there, her
mother and siblings went to walmart and left her alone with the accused.
she alleges the
accused brought her downstairs to the basement to one of the bedrooms, where
there was an air mattress and a bed up against the wall. a curtain covered half
of the basement. the complainant remembers laying down on either the air
mattress or bed and the accused directly beside her. she testified that he
placed his hands in her pants, underneath her underwear. she was lying down and
the accused was beside her.
he touched the
top of her vagina and then digitally penetrated her vagina. she described his
hands to be moving while he touched inside her vagina.
she also alleged
the accused took her hand and placed it
“…under his underwear”
and then
on his penis and was moving her hand while making contact with his penis. his
hand was on top of his clothes. she elaborated by stating,
“he didn’t use
any words to ask me, he just grabbed my hand and did it.”
she explained
that their clothes were still on.
at some point,
the accused got up and left the basement while she remained there until dinner
when either her uncle or second cousin called her upstairs for supper. she
remembers having pizza for dinner.
after the third
alleged incident, the complainant did not see the accused again except for one
occasion in 2022, approximately a year prior to providing her video statement
to police in may 2023. this was a chance encounter in the donavan area of
sudbury. she was on her way to a local convenience store when she saw the
accused talking to some unidentified people while holding a guitar. she
testified that he was staring at her. to her, he looked the same as before but
only
“skinnier”.
his hair appeared to be similar to what she described
in these incidents.
the degree of familiarity with the accused in
conjunction with the identification evidence
in applying the
applicable legal principles, there must be a more specific discussion in how
the identity evidence in this trial should be considered because the
complainant has some degree of familiarity with the accused. throughout my
analysis, at all times i am cautiously aware of the risks of identification
evidence even among people the complainant is familiar with and recognizes.
this is not a
case of a complainant attempting to identify a stranger in a fleeting moment
during a single incident with no prior or subsequent interactions. more
accurately, the complainant and the accused knew each other at the time because
he was living at the residence the complainant visited as part of her access
visits in her mother’s home.
it has been
established that each of these access visits with her mother lasted a few days
on each occasion and happened on a bi-weekly or weekly basis. her level of
familiarity and history of interactions with the accused may enhance or
diminish the reliability of her recognition evidence in conjunction with the
other sources of identification evidence available on the record before me.
the evidentiary
record is robust and permits me to distinguish the other boyfriends of n.l. who
may have also had the opportunity to commit one or more of these offences.
this distinguishing evidence came in the form of physical descriptors but also
the individual personal circumstances of each prior boyfriend that assisted me
in assessing the reliability of the identification evidence that i find
ultimately points to the accused.
during the time
of the alleged incidents, the complainant was living with her father and had
access visits with her mother. according to her and r.l., their mother had four
different boyfriends during this relevant time frame. two of these men were
known as shane, the third was sean and the fourth was p.g., not necessarily in
this order.
r.l. recalls
that when he first lived with his mother, her boyfriend shane also moved in
along with his two daughters. he was unable to provide a physical description
of this first shane but i remind myself that there is absolutely no evidence
that suggests the accused’s own daughters moved into n.l.’s home with him, like
this first shane had arranged.
after n.l. and
this first shane separated, her next boyfriend that moved in was another man
bearing the name shane. r.l. described this second shane as
“…a little
short”,
tanned skin with a small beard and moustache with hair
“pretty close to
p.g.
’s”.
again, the
distinguishing features in comparison between this second shane and the accused
are self-explanatory. r.l. recalled the accused was tall, fit, had a beard,
tattoos and short hair. in describing the accused’s personality, he testified
that the accused liked to sing and play the guitar. he specifically remembered
the accused had a tattoo on the back of his hand that resembled cheese. this
intrigued him and he asked the accused about this tattoo. this conversation was
later confirmed by the accused in his testimony.
he was able to
identify the accused in the courtroom and affirmed his recognition of the
accused since he knew him for a significant period of time. he recognized his
face and his tattoos and noticed him to be slimmer today.
as for his hair,
r.l. observed that in court today, his hair is a lot
“shorter and cut back”
when compared to when they lived together. back then, it was relatively short
but not as short as now.
when he was
shown exhibit 4, he assumed that the accused had his hair at a similar length
most of the time, but couldn’t place an image in his mind of what his hair
actually looked like when he was living with them.
i remind myself that detailed descriptions of those we are more familiar with
may not be as elaborate. it is a commonsense observation that
with the passage of time, many people may not take explicit note of the same
features that strangers would.
n.l. also
confirmed that she had dated two men with the first name shane just prior to
dating the accused in 2018. specifically, shane gauthier was the man she had
dated just prior to the accused for an unknown period of time.
assessing the reliability of the complainant’s
identification evidence
according to the
complainant, when she was living primarily with her father and visiting her
mother, there were two men with the first name
“shane”
who dated her
mother in consecutive order. one shane had two little girls and the other had
one little girl.
“shane a”
– i will refer to “shane a” as the first shane described by the complainant. this
may be the second shane described by r.l. to be short and with a beard. the
complainant described “shane a” to be shorter in stature but with a scar on his
lip and “really short” in comparison to the other, much taller “shane”. shane a
had brownish black hair that was
“kind of flat”
and he always wore a
hat. these descriptions are quite different than the taller accused who was not
known to wear a hat but i am aware that there still remains a remote
possibility the complainant may have mistaken shane a to be the accused.
“shane b”
– to distinguish the next boyfriend with the same name, i will refer to him as
“shane b”. according to the complainant, shane b was tall and skinny, over 6
feet tall bald, and she described his hair as,
“kinda like a buzz”;
i am
alert to the possibility that the complainant might have mistaken shane b as
the accused. however, i remind myself that the accused has two daughters. shane
b is likely the earlier shane according to r.l., who moved into his mother’s
home with his two daughters. the accused did not move into n.l.’s home with his
two daughters who happened to reside in pembroke during the material time.
however, even if
i am wrong, the other shane was described by the complainant to have one
daughter. the accused does not have one daughter and this is a distinguishing
feature the complainant was aware of. i am cautiously aware of the possibility
the complainant had mistaken the accused as shane b, or the earlier shane
described by r.l. however, the cumulative effect of the descriptions and
familiarity described by the complainant, r.l. and n.l. combined with the
testimony of the accused leads me to conclude that she is not mistaken.
during
cross-examination, the complainant firmly rejected the notion that she had
confused the tall, skinny shane who had a buzz cut with the accused, that i
have referred to as “shane b”. she also rejected the suggestion put to her by
defence counsel that the accused had a buzzcut but later admitted this was a
possibility when shown exhibit 4. she nonetheless insisted the accused’s hair was
not short and that he had longer hair.
“sean”
–
she doesn’t recall what he looked like and had only met once or twice. she
explained that she did not know him very well. during the time her mother dated
this man, her parenting time was shared equally between her mother and father.
this was not the parenting arrangement she had when she was in her mother’s
home with the accused present. during those access visits, i remind myself that
the accused himself admitted the complainant had access visits with her mother
on weekends from fridays to sundays, perhaps bi-weekly. i am satisfied the
complainant has not mistaken sean as the accused in describing these sexual
assaults to the court.
the complainant’s recognition identification evidence
of the accused
“p.g.”
–
the complainant testified that she had seen the accused on every occasion that
she visited her mother over the course of a few months. as indicated, these
visits to her mother’s place happened either weekly or bi-weekly on weekends
from fridays to sundays. she admitted during cross-examination that during
those visits, she interacted with him throughout the household from the moment
she awoke until bedtime. those interactions included having meals and watching
television together. she also remembers that he smelled like marijuana and
cigarettes. he smoked cigarettes in her presence but never drank or consumed
marijuana in her presence. despite this, she was unable to recall if the
accused had any tattoos.
she described
the accused’s hair to be shorter in court than at the time of the alleged
offences and described him to be in his mid-20s at the time of these alleged
offences. she testified that two out of the three incidents happened when she
visited her mother’s residence near a waterpark and playground with three
slides. she also described this location to be near a public library [address
removed] in sudbury, across the street from the shopping mall walking distance
from a harvey’s and library.
more
specifically, she described the man she knew as
“
p.g.
”
to be
tall, skinny and had hair colour that was,
“kinda like a ginger,”
and
“kinda
curly hair. like not like really curly, but like curly enough to say it’s
curly.
”
she indicated in her testimony that she meant to say that his hair was
“wavy”
but didn’t know how to describe it. in her video, she described its length as
“…not
really long, but not short.”
she also explained that he often had
headphones on.
as for the length
of his hair, she expressed in the video,
“….i don’t know, like around his
eyes”
and with
“…a little bit of a moustache and a beard,”
but
shaved most of the time,
“with a little stubble.”
during
cross-examination, she agreed with mr. primeau that his hair was in the middle
of his eyes at his eyebrows, or just above.
she disputed that the accused had a buzz cut and insisted that his hair was
longer at the time of the allegations. in doing so, she also rejected any
notion that she had confused the accused as being one of the shanes,
specifically, shane b, who also had a buzz cut.
mr. primeau
presented to the complainant a photo of the accused with short brown hair. at
the time it was shown to her during cross-examination, it had not yet been
authenticated specifically as to when it was taken.
he asked the
complainant if it was possible that the accused had short hair, as shown in
exhibit 4, throughout the years 2016 to 2018 when he dated her mother. the
complainant initially responded that she did not believe so but later agreed
that it was possible.
later in the
trial, mr. primeau showed this same photo to n.l., who insisted that it was
taken after the year 2020. however, at the time he asked the complainant
questions regarding exhibit 4, he did not have a date as to when this photo was
taken. it was only after he questioned the complainant, and when n.l. testified
subsequently, that it was established that exhibit 4 was taken after the year
2020, sometime after the alleged time frame of the incidents.
when asked to
expand on the colour of his hair, she explained that it was,
“kinda like a
ginger”
“not necessarily a ginger”,
“i don’t want to say like
brownish”,
“…like in the middle between them.
”
during cross-examination, mr. primeau pointed out that the accused’s hair
colour today is quite dark and not ginger in colour, and that this was his hair
colour at the material time of the allegations. the complainant agreed with
defence counsel’s characterization but maintained that she perceives the accused’s
hair colour in court to be in between brownish and ginger.
the complainant
explained that she has a hard time being around people that looked or acted
like the accused. for example, she has a hard time being around people that had
a similar ginger tone to their hair.
later in this
line of questioning, when it was put to her that a ginger is a person with red
hair, she elaborated with her interpretation of what the hair colour ginger
looks like. from her perspective, someone with ginger coloured hair does not
necessarily have red hair because the term ginger can also encompass a person
with lighter hair and others with darker hair.
however, when it
was put to her that the accused has always had short hair, she disagreed with
mr. primeau and maintained that at the time of the allegations, the accused’s
hair was longer than it is today.
the physical descriptions of the accused changed
frequently and is largely subjective
a significant
portion of this trial was focused on the hair colour, length and style of the
accused at the time of the alleged events, during his relationship with n.l.
and even during the course of these trial dates.
what’s telling
is the highly subjective nature of this evidence from the eye of the beholder.
for example, when mr. primeau cross-examined the complainant on the accused’s
hair colour in court, she maintained her subjective perception of the accused’s
hair colour in court to be in between brownish and ginger.
and yet, mr.
primeau described this same hair on the accused and the very same moment to be
dark brown and not ginger in colour.
i have carefully
reviewed the numerous descriptions of the accused’s hair from each of the
witnesses that spanned all the years of his life beginning from his childhood
to the dates of this trial. objectively, the range of hair colour include
variations that may be explained due to the highly subjective nature of the
perceived shades at any given point in time. similarly, the range of hair style
and length is prone to the same subjective perceptions and natural variations
over time.
what has become
abundantly clear to me is that n.l. characterization of the accused’s physical
description is in my view, the most persuasive. furthermore, as the person who
had dated the accused, she is best positioned to describe the range of physical
features he exhibited throughout the period of opportunity. she described the
accused’s physical description to change repeatedly throughout the course of
their relationship and presumably, when the accused would have had the
opportunity to sexually assault the complainant.
judging by the
two photos of the accused in exhibits 3 and 4, and the range of hair colours
and styles as described by each of the witnesses presented by both sides,
ranging from dirty blonde to dark brown, to short buzzed hair to longer unkept
hair and a beard, i am of the view that n.l.’s characterization of the
accused’s appearance as one that had varied from time to time is the most
accurate.
i find that the
accused’s appearance changed frequently and there is no persuasive evidence
before me that detracts away from the core descriptions and identification
provided by the complainant. her observations as described are entirely
plausible.
exhibit 3 enhances the reliability of the complainant’s
identification of the accused
the physical
description provided by the complainant is strikingly similar to exhibit 3. his
hair appears brown, but yet with a hint of ginger on top with hair halfway down
his forehead. he has wavy hair, not quite curly, but wavy enough to notice with
a long, brown beard also with hints of lighter colored brown hair. having been
homeless, couch surfing and struggling with daily substance use, i accept that
at the time of the alleged incident, his hair would have been on the longer and
unkept side in exhibit 3 as opposed to shorter and clean cut as portrayed in
exhibit 4.
the photo in
exhibit 3 gives me confidence in the reliability of the identification evidence
provided by the complainant, even before i consider the degree of interaction
she had with the accused. i find it entirely plausible that his hair was as
described by the complainant during the periods of time she alleged these three
incidents happened to her.
i did not find
the evidence or cross-examination presented by the defence to be persuasive in
any respects on the issues of opportunity and identity. given the relative ease
in which hair appearances change in a brief period of time, this evidence did
little to detract away from the very clear descriptions provided by the
complainant of the accused; a person known to her.
during
cross-examination, the complainant admitted that when she provided her video
statement, she did not remember whether or not the accused had tattoos. but
upon seeing the accused in court visibly displaying tattoos on his arms, she
seemed to recall that he did have tattoos.
within this
context, i am also mindful that peripheral details of a traumatic event can be
difficult to recall and accurately describe later.
to this end, i am not concerned that the complainant was unable to recall
initially if the accused had any tattoos. moreover, in a careful review of the
questioning conducted by counsel, neither side explored with the complainant whether
or not those tattoos would have otherwise been plainly visible at the time of
the alleged three incidents when factors of lighting and clothing are
concerned.
for example, in
court, mr. primeau went through great lengths to demonstrate the accused’s
tattoos through a.o. i note, however, that many of those tattoos were initially
covered by sleeves or pant legs and required the accused to take steps to
adjust his clothing to reveal same to a.o. no evidence is before me as to what
the accused might have been wearing at the time of the alleged incidents or
whether they were simply covered up with his clothing and not visible to the
complainant. to this end, the lack of recollection on her part as it relates to
the accused’s tattoos is a neutral factor as it relates to her reliability.
the overall credibility and reliability of the
complainant in consideration of the totality of the evidence
at trial, the complainant was 15 years old but testified to events
that she believed happened when she was between the ages of six to eight. as it
relates to opportunity, i have already found that the accused had access
to the complainant and opportunities to commit these offences as early as
december 2017, to as late as june 2019 when the complainant was between eight
to nine years old. as i carefully review each of the descriptions provided by
the complainant and r.l., it is clear to me that the complainant was able to
accurately distinguish both men with the first name shane and sean
from
the accused due to their respective heights, how they behaved, their personal
family circumstances in conjunction with her level of familiarity with the
accused himself in consideration of the amount of time she was in his presence
at n.l.’s home.
having
considered the totality of the evidence before me, and the various physical
descriptions of the three other boyfriends that could have been mistaken by the
complainant to be the one who sexually assaulted her, i am persuaded beyond a
reasonable doubt that she was accurately describing the accused as the one who
had sexually assaulted her on all three occasions during the material time.
my belief is
strengthened with the corroborating evidence provided by the accused himself in
this trial and in consideration of the testimony of each witness. he admitted,
at a bare minimum, to have had direct access to the complainant on at least two
occasions when she visited n.l’s home for access. he further agreed with the
complainant’s testimony that each of these visits would have taken place over a
weekend from friday to sunday. he also admitted to visiting n.l.’s second cousin’s
home, although without the complainant as she alleged where the third incident
took place.
the precise
location of n.l.’s residence in sudbury where the first two incidents are
alleged to have happened is corroborated by n.l. and a.o.
furthermore, the
accused himself admitted to owning and playing a guitar, precisely as described
by the complainant when she recognized him in 2022, a year prior to providing
her video statement to police and after the alleged incident. her
identification of the accused was corroborated by the accused himself, a.o.,
and r.l., each of whom described the accused to play the guitar.
the
opportunities, physical identification and parenting arrangements within n.l.’s
home for these sexual assaults to have been committed by the accused were not
only corroborated by r.l., but by n.l., a material witness called by the
defence.
with respect to
the first incident alleged by the complainant, n.l. testified the complainant
wanted to remain home with the accused while she went to the corner store. she
returned and suspected that something had happened:
“the video
refreshed my memory. i remember we – we were going to the store. z.b. wanted to
stay behind with p.g. we went to the store; we came back. i recall walking in,
and it felt awkward; it felt like either we surprised them, like we were back
too soon or something, and there – like, there was weird vibe, and i asked if
everything was okay.”
i wish to make
it clear that i do not attach any weight whatsoever to n.l.’s evidence as it
relates to suspecting something awkward in the moment when she returned home
and saw the accused alone with the complainant. she had taken the complainant
aside and asked her if anything had happened to her to which she denied.
however, statements made by the accused to n.l. have some probative value. upon
her return from the store, the accused admitted to having a serious
conversation with the complainant about something. n.l. explained the
interaction with the accused this way:
“i asked if
everything was okay. i recall p.g. tell me everything was okay; he would talk
to me later about it. that they had a serious conversation, and that he would
talk to me about it later.”
this is relevant
in a more specific sense, because it corroborates the testimony of the
complainant in relation to the first alleged incident and provides me with a
general sense of the nature of the accused’s interaction with her.
i find that
there was exclusive opportunity for the accused to have sexually assaulted the
complainant after she returned home from the splash pad and was left alone with
the accused by n.l. it is also probative of some form of one-on-one interaction
between the accused and the complainant on this occasion that was not routine
and that he perceived to be serious enough to discuss with her mother at a
later point, presumably in the absence of the child.
this evidence
alone does not prove that the accused did anything to the complainant. but in
combination with other evidence, it adds an element of credibility and
reliability to the complainant’s recollection of what happened to her with
respect to the first alleged incident of sexual touching. it also assists me in
weighing the accused’s evidence when he testified to having little to no
interaction with the complainant.
on this point, n.l.
went on to explain the degree of interaction and responsibility the accused had
with her children, including the complainant that provides me with some insight
into the degree of trust and authority he had with the complainant when he
lived in her home.
i find that for
significant periods of time during their relationship, she had no concerns with
the accused taking care of her children, including the complainant. i accept
that it was the complainant who had wanted to stay home with him when n.l. went
to the store during the first incident and that she took turns with the accused
tucking the children into bed at night.
this degree of
interaction and responsibility the accused had with the children speaks to the
level of trust and comfort n.l. and her children, including the complainant,
had with the accused during the material times he stayed in her home and had
the opportunities to commit these offences.
in a careful
review of mr. primeau’s cross-examination of the complainant, i have found her
evidence to be unshaken, credible and reliable. i did not detect any effort on
her part to embellish or fill in the gaps in her memory. at no point was she
defensive when pressed on her memory of the events and i did not sense any
attempt on her part to exaggerate or manufacture what she says the accused did
to her. her evidence regarding the issues of identity and opportunity as well
as the specific details recounting how the accused touched her vagina and
instructed her to touch his penis were unwavering and persuasive.
i do not have
any concerns regarding the complainant’s credibility. her evidence was
consistent and firm in belief. focusing on the core allegations of sexual
touching, there was a lack of material inconsistencies elicited from her by mr.
primeau.
there was not a
hint of any motive or attempt on her part to fabricate these allegations or to
mislead the court. ultimately, she stood firm in her specific memory in how the
three incidents happened, where the accused touched her and to what degree her
sexual integrity was violated. various aspects of her testimony were
corroborated by the accused himself, n.l. and r.l.
she conceded
portions of her testimony where she could not remember or did not know the answers
to, but the record proves that the core allegations of sexual touching remain
consistent and persuasive in both details and descriptions. for example, she
readily admitted that she could not remember if the accused accompanied them to
the splash pad prior to the first incident of sexual touching. she also could
not recall which brother had interrupted the touching in her room during the
second incident.
but nothing in
her video statement to police, examination in chief or cross-examination
weakened her otherwise consistent and detailed memory of where these distinct
events took place and the manner in which she was touched by the accused.
the focus of the
defence on behalf of the accused is in the reliability of the complainant’s
evidence.
as it relates to
her reliability, it is clear to me that the complainant had interacted with the
accused on several access visits that took place at her mother’s home. these
interactions went on for days within the common household they were both in at
the time during these weekend visits. the visits were not brief in any way
shape or form.
as i closely
compare the physical descriptions and personal characteristics of the two
shanes, and sean, as provided by the complainant and r.l., i am not concerned
that the complainant is confusing the identity of the person who touched her.
it is no surprise that the complainant was unshaken during cross-examination
when the various descriptions of these 3 other boyfriends were put to her. she
maintained that at the time she was living primarily with her father and had
access visits with her mother, the accused was the one who had sexually
assaulted her during those access visits.
these visits
were not moments in passing. rather, they included a living arrangement with
the accused residing in the same household with the complainant over the course
of several days during multiple access visits. this is an important factor to
consider as i consider the reliability of the complainant’s recognition
identification evidence and the inherent frailties associated with
identification evidence.
during
cross-examination, the complainant volunteered that he had informally changed
his name when he dated her mother from
“p”
to
“m”
to now
“s”
or something similar. during cross-examination, mr. primeau put to the
complainant that the name of the person who actually touched was identified as
“m”
or
“s”.
she rejected this suggestion outright and affirmed that the
accused had historically changed his name when he dated her mother.
while the dates
of the alleged sexual assaults do not appear to coincide with the specific time
frames as provided by the accused and n.l., given the broader time frame
outside of the actual dating relationship when the accused had access to the
complainant, the admissions by the accused to access and the fact that i have
no concerns of a mistaken identity involving any of the three prior boyfriends,
this error in dates from the complainant is of no moment.
each of the
three incidents she described contain detailed descriptions of how the accused
approached her, including who else was present or absent within the homes, the
physical layout and descriptions of the basement room, and what she ate for
supper after the touching happened on that third occasion. the level of detail
in how z.b. was able to explain to the officer and the court precisely where
the accused touched her and how he did so on each occasion was convincing and
consistent throughout.
when i consider
her evidence in conjunction with the other witnesses including the accused,
particularly in consideration of the amount of detail provided in each of her
descriptions of the alleged sexual assaults, i find her to be a credible and
reliable witness.
my confidence in
finding the identity evidence provided by the complainant to be reliable is
because of the significant corroboration provided by the accused himself but
also in recognition that her interactions with the accused were not for brief
moments in time. in other words, given the frequency and length of time she was
in the accused’s company, it is abundantly clear to me that in each of the
sexual assaults alleged by the complainant, she is accurately describing him as
the person who touched her and invited her to touch him.
her interactions
with the accused happened days at a time on multiple occasions within the same
household. she was able to describe details of their interactions including her
recollection that the accused was silent for the remainder of the day within
the home after sexually assaulting her. her post incident identification of the
accused in the donavan neighbourhood of sudbury in 2022 while possessing a guitar
adds to the reliability of her identification evidence.
the accused
testified that he had stayed at n.l.’s residence for approximately one month
and a half to two months and then upon returning from pembroke, on additional
occasions for up to a couple of weeks.
as it relates to
reliability, the accused himself testified to being heavily addicted to
substances and consuming hard drugs on a daily basis at the alleged material
times he lived at n.l.’s home. this causes me to have great concerns with respect
to the reliability of what he has testified to. i am left with very little
confidence that what he has testified to is accurate and reliable. for these
reasons, i do not accept the accused’s evidence.
w.d.
analysis
i mindful of the presumption of innocence and remind myself that
the crown bears the burden at all times to prove the essential elements of the
offences beyond a reasonable doubt. credibility forms a central component of my
analysis. the principles set out by the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
w.(d)
provide a requisite framework in determining whether the crown has proven
the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. in applying the test in
w.(d),
i have considered the totality of the evidence including all potential sources
of reasonable doubt including doubt left by
the complainant's evidence, the doubt created by the evidence of
the accused, the doubt found in any other evidence or the doubt arising from
the combination of those sources.”
i have also
considered the guidance on child witnesses from
r. v. b.g.
and
w.(r.)
,
and approached the identification evidence with caution as i consider the
reliability of the evidence in totality.
as the trier of fact, i may
believe
some, none, or all of the testimony of any witness, including that of an
accused.
i must also remind myself that
if, after a careful consideration of all of the evidence, i am
unable to decide whom to believe, i must acquit.
with respect, i
reject the accused’s assertion that he was never left alone with the
complainant and was unable to recall having any conversations with her during
the entirety of their interactions within the same home. there is no logical or
rational reason for such a restrictive measure of interaction within the same
household during those access visits that spanned from fridays to sundays on
several occasions. i reject the accused’s evidence as it relates to the degree
of interaction and responsibility he had over the complainant and find that he
was similar to a step-father to the children, as described by r.l. two examples
that illustrate the degree of trust and responsibility instilled within the
accused was described by n.l. and included putting the children to bed and
being left alone with the complainant while she went to the corner store.
furthermore,
after careful consideration of the totality of the evidence, i also find the
accused’s evidence on the issues of opportunity and his physical identification
to be untruthful. the evidence from each witness in conjunction with the photo
exhibits add credence to n.l.’s characterization of the accused’s identity
changing which included modifications to his hair style, length and colour. she
specifically disputed the suggestion from mr. primeau that the accused’s hair
looked more like exhibit 4, shorter hair when they dated in 2018. she further
insisted that his physical appearance was predominantly long and curly which at
times, included a beard. in sum, she described his hair colour to include
blondish, dirty blonde, perhaps slightly on the red side, but more blonde. to
her, his appearance changed frequently between weeks to months.
in consideration
of the totality of the evidence of identification, i have found that the
accused physical appearance changed on a consistent basis during the times of
the alleged incidents and that during this period, his appearance included hair
colour, length and styles similar to exhibit 3 and as described by the
complainant.
i am persuaded
beyond a reasonable doubt that there is no question that on each of the three
occasions, the acts he committed upon the complainant violated her sexual
integrity as a young child.
each of the
three incidents described by her were detailed and uncontradicted in any
material way on the trial record before me. the complainant withstood
cross-examination effectively and i found her evidence to increase in
persuasiveness as the trial progressed with the calling of each witness.
numerous aspects of her testimony were corroborated by r.l., n.l. and the
accused himself. after carefully comparing the physical descriptions and
characteristics of each of the other boyfriends, i can confidently find that
any suggestion of her misidentifying the accused or confusing him with another
prior boyfriend of n.l. was pure speculation at best.
i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the events as described by the complainant
happened in the way she described them. i specifically reject the denials
expressed by the accused with respect to each of the three distinct incidents
of sexual assault, sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching.
objectively, her evidence was not contradicted in any material way as it
relates to the core sexual assaults in each incident.
the accused
himself had ample opportunity to commit these sexual offences upon the
complainant. given the reliability and credibility concerns i have with his
evidence, nothing he says detracts away from the totality of the evidence
before me that strongly points to guilt on all three counts.
the true risk of
misidentification is weak and i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the
complainant has reliably identified the accused as the individual who sexually
assaulted her on three distinct occasions between january 1, 2015 to december
31, 2019. having carefully considered the totality of the evidence before me in
conjunction with the submissions of counsel, i accept beyond a reasonable doubt
that the testimony of the complainant was credible and reliable in every
respect of the essential elements as alleged on counts 1, 3 and 5 of the
information.
conclusion:
i answer the
following three questions in
w.d.
in the following way:
1.
i did not find the accused’s evidence to be credible or
reliable. unless otherwise stated, i do not accept his evidence particularly as
it relates to opportunity, identification and his denial with respect to these
three offences of a sexual nature involving z.b.
2.
i have carefully considered the evidence presented by
the accused in conjunction with the totality of the trial evidence. it does not
leave me with a reasonable doubt on any essential elements of the offences.
3.
the complainant was credible and her descriptions of
each distinct incident of sexual touching was detailed and consistent
throughout. as i carefully consider the totality of the evidence, i find beyond
a reasonable doubt that her evidence was credible and reliable. her memory was
ultimately accurate as it relates to her physical identification of the accused
in consideration of the nature of her repeated interactions with him and her
level of familiarity. the surrounding factual circumstances expressed by z.b.
were corroborated by most of the witnesses, including the accused, adding to
her reliability and credibility.
she gave detailed descriptions of each of the
core allegations that remain highly convincing after cross-examination and a
careful critique of her video statement and examination in chief. while
uncertain on peripheral details such as dates and tattoos, her core allegations
remained consistent. based on the evidence that i do accept, i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed each of the distinct
offences upon z.b.
accordingly,
there will be findings of guilt on counts 1, 3 and 5.
i wish to thank
mr. primeau and ms. bourassa for their effective advocacy.
released:  december
22, 2025
justice leonard kim
video, pg. 60 line 15.
june 24/25, pg. 28.
2
june 24/25, pg. 28.
june 24/25, pg. 31.
r. v. w.(r),
1992 canlii 56 (scc)
,
2 s.c.r. 122
at paras.
23-25
.
ibid,
para. 25.
june 12, pg. 80.
june 12, pg. 78 (line 29).
june 12, pg. 80.
june 13/25, pg. 29.
june 13/25, pg. 30.
june 24/25, pg. 4.
june 24/25, pg. 3, 6.
june 24/25, pg. 7.
june 24/25, pg. 17.
june 24/25, pg. 20-21.
june 24/25, pg. 21.
june 24/25, pg. 22.
june 13/25, pg. 34-35.
june 12/25, pg. 86.
june 24/25, pg. 77.
june 24/25, pg. 56.
r. v. hibbert
,
2022 scc 39
at
paras.
50-53
.
r. v. downey
,
2018 nsca 33
at para.
53
.
r. v.
stevenson
,
2024 skca 40
at para.
61
.
stevenson
,
at para.
62
;
r. v. bob
,
2008 bcca 485
at para.
13
.
r. v. olliffe
,
2015 onca 242
at
paras.
38-39
r. v. chafe
,
2019 onca 113
at
para.
29
.
ibid,
at para. 30.
r. v. kytwayhat
,
2021 skca 67
at
para.
23
;
r. v. bob
,
2008 bcca 485
at paras.
12-13
.
“modern criminal evidence”,
2022, greenspan, rondinelli (editors), gourlay, jones, makepeace, crisp,
pomerance, pg. 653,
citing
r. v. downey
,
2018 nsca 33
at para.
69
.
june 12, pg. 80.
june 12, pg. 82.
r. v. downey
,
2018 nsca 33
at
para.
69
.
june 12/25, pg. 51, line 13-15.
video transcript, pg. 50.
june 12/25, pg. 38-39.
june 12/25 – pg. 45.
june 12/25 – pg. 45.
r. v. a.a.
,
2023 onca 174
at
para.
17
.
june 13/25, pg. 41.
june 13/25, pg. 42, line 1- 4.
r. v. w. (d
),
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r.
742
.
r. v. e.m.w
.
,
2009 nspc 33
, aff’d
2011 scc 31
at para.
47
.