ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. i.h.,
2025 oncj 734
date:  october
5, 2025
court
file no.:  brampton ycja
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
i.h. (a young person)
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 02 october 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 05 october 2025
j. vlacic...................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
d. stein............................................................................ counsel
for the young person i.h.
sentencing decision under the
youth
criminal justice act
(“
ycja
”)
renwick j.:
introduction
the young person pleaded guilty to three counts of
robbery. these were violent car-jackings.
the parties jointly propose a sentence that accounts for an excessive
amount of time that the young person spent in pre-trial custody and acknowledges
that a significant period of probation and ancillary orders are required.
the
evidence and findings
the parties agree that the young person acted
with others to forcefully take two vehicles and attempt to steal a third, which
ended when the victim fought back and the young person and his accomplice ran
away.
on 27 april 2023, 60-year-old weiling feng was grabbed
by the neck and forcibly pulled away from her 2012 mercedes sedan outside a
community centre at 7:47 p.m..
on 10 may 2023, 74-year-old claudette maalouf
was forcefully dragged from her 2020 hyundai kona sedan in a walmart parking
lot at 7:30 a.m. ms. maalouf was treated at the hospital for minor injuries.
she had limited mobility for a few weeks and continues to suffer psychologically
from the trauma of the robbery.
on 14 june 2023, garvinder nath was accosted by
the young person and another male while delivering pizza at 1:30 a.m. they beat
him and threatened the use of a gun. mr. nath fought back and the young person
and the other male fled.
mr. nath was then murdered on 09 july 2023 while
delivering a pizza to an empty home. it is unknown if this murder is related to
the attempted car-jacking one month prior.
initially, the young person confessed to mr.
nath’s murder as a way to have the police return him to canada from a boarding
school in africa. the young person was arrested for that murder and was held in
custody for many months until he admitted having made a false confession. a
search of the young person’s cell phone revealed his role in these three robberies.
photographs of the two stolen vehicles were
found in the young person’s  cell phone. also, there were messages to others
bragging about the young person’s role as a getaway driver. ms. maalouf was
described as “sum old lady” and the young person used four laughing emoji’s following
his message about her robbery. his message bragged that, “we made like 18k off
these 2 [cars].”
there are few mitigating features to consider:
i.
the offender is a young person; he was 13 and 14
years old at the time of these robberies;
ii.
the young person pleaded guilty;
iii.
the young person apologized in court for his
actions;
iv.
the young person has begun his rehabilitation
while in custody; and
v.
the young person did not have a prior youth court
record.
there are some aggravating factors as well:
i.
the young person’s actions caused lasting
psychological injury to at least one of his victims;
ii.
the young person bragged that he had profited
financially from these callous attacks;
iii.
the victims were all vulnerable in different
ways; and
iv.
the young person used actual violence and
threatened violence to achieve or attempt to achieve his aims.
discussion
the parties are joined that this case meets the threshold for
consideration of custody pursuant to s.39(1)(d) of the
ycja
, which
reads:
a youth justice court shall not
commit a young person to custody under section 42 (youth sentences) unless
…
(d) in exceptional cases where the
young person has committed an indictable offence, the aggravating circumstances
of the offence are such that the imposition of a non-custodial sentence would
be inconsistent with the purpose and principles set out in s. 38.
according
to s. 38(1) of the
ycja
, the purpose of sentencing a young person is to
hold them accountable through the imposition of just sanctions that have
meaningful consequences for the young person and that promote their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society, thereby contributing to the
long-term protection of the public.
the
principles in s.38 require that sentences for young persons:
i.
should not result in a punishment that is greater than would be
appropriate for an adult in similar circumstances;
ii.
should be similar to sentences for others in this region found guilty in
similar circumstances;
iii.
should be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence and the level
of responsibility of the young person;
iv.
should consider all other sanctions besides custody that are reasonable;
v.
should be the least restrictive sentence, which is most likely to
rehabilitate and reintegrate the young person into society and promote a sense
of responsibility and acknowledgement by the young person of the harm done; and
vi.
which may denounce unlawful conduct and deter the young person from
further offence.
as well, i am required to take into account the following in
determining an appropriate youth sentence:
i.
the degree of participation of the young person in the offence;
ii.
the harm done to any victims;
iii.
any reparations made by the young person to the community;
iv.
time spent in detention;
v.
previous findings of guilt; and
vi.
any other aggravating or mitigating factors.
i
have taken into account the sentencing principles, the facts of this case, the ancillary
consequence of significant pre-trial detention, and the submissions of two
senior, experienced counsel. i find that s.39(1)(d) applies and custody could
be imposed as an appropriate punishment in this case. i also find that a
custodial sentence is the only sentence which can meet all of the requirements
of s.38, and specifically subs. 38(2)(a), (b), (c), (e)(i),(ii), and (iii) and
(f)(i) and (ii).
the
parties have not sought a pre-sentence report as required by s. 39(6) of the
act.
to the extent that i am able to do so, i have acceded to the request not to
apply this subsection for the following reasons:
i.
the matter has been before the courts for 13 months, which is
significant to the young person; any further delay may be detrimental to the
mental health of the young person and the complainants;
ii.
the young person has not requested a pre-sentence report; and
iii.
although the disposition speaks of a sentence of custody, no actual
custody is to be imposed.
the
young person was arrested in november 2023. he remained in custody until june
2025. he has been in custody for approximately 10 months on these offences. i
am being asked to apportion the eligible pre-trial detention (from august 2024
until june 2025) with enhanced credit at a rate of 1.25:1 for every day spent.
this is not unreasonable in light of the following:
i.
despite his learning disability, the young person has made enormous
gains while in youth detention; he has earned 26 certificates of completion or
recognition for character, courses, training, and athletics while in custody;
ii.
the young person accrued pre-trial detention from november 2023 until
his arrest for these offences (august 2024) for a charge that was recently
withdrawn and will never be applied; and
iii.
under the
ycja
, young persons who offend do not earn remission on
custodial sentences.
reluctantly,
i will accede to the joint proposal, although it is on the low end of what is
fit and appropriate for these offences and this young offender.
i
will apportion 12.5 months of pre-trial detention to the offences as follows:
i.
4 months of custody (deemed already served) for the april 2023 robbery;
ii.
4.5 months of custody (deemed already served) for the may 2023 robbery,
served consecutively; and
iii.
4 months of custody (deemed already served) for the june 2023 robbery,
served consecutively.
as
well, the young person is ordered to comply with the following terms of
probation for 18 months:
1.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour;
2.
appear before the youth justice court when required;
3.
report to a youth probation officer no later than 19 october 2025, and
thereafter as directed;
4.
you are prohibited from owning or possessing any weapon, ammunition,
prohibited ammunition, prohibited device or explosive substance;
5.
maintain suitable efforts to continue your education or to obtain
employment;
6.
reside in any place where the youth probation officer directs;
7.
complete any releases of information in favour of the youth probation
officer to permit the supervision of your participation in employment or
education;
8.
have no contact, directly or indirectly, except through legal counsel,
with weiling feng, claudette maalouf, and jahvon golding, except for the
purposes of the
education act
; and
9.
have no contact with anyone known to you to have a youth court or
criminal record, except family relations or for the purposes of the
education
act
.
on consent, pursuant to s. 51 of the
ycja
,
the young person is prohibited from possessing any firearm, cross-bow,
prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition, or explosive substance for five years.
on consent, the young person must submit to peel
regional police by 16 november 2025 to provide a sample of his deoxyribonucleic
acid (“dna”). the dna will be taken by the least intrusive manner, respecting the
young person’s bodily integrity, privacy, health, and all appropriate precautions.
the dna will be analyzed and the results will be uploaded onto a national
database for criminal investigative purposes. if the young person does not voluntarily
submit to dna sampling, force may be used to take a sample of his dna.
conclusion
the young person is hereby sentenced to probation
in recognition of his having already served the equivalent of 12.5 months in a
youth custodial facility for three counts of robbery.
i wish the young person well in his
rehabilitation for his sake and that of our community.
released:  05 october 2025
justice
g. paul renwick