ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gallardo-madrid,
2025 oncj 487
date:
2025 september 23
court
file: toronto #24 48106377
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ricardo gallardo-madrid
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on september 10, 2025
written
reasons provided on september 23, 2025
a. kiran................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
l. kiss………………………………………………………………………………..…..amicus
mr. gallardo-madrid…………………………………………………………..did
not appear
jones j.:
introduction
on july 14, 2025, i found mr. gallardo-madrid
guilty of two counts of assault with a weapon and one count of using an
imitation firearm to commit an indictable offence. the crown proceeded by
indictment.
mr. kiss was, during the trial, counsel for mr.
gallardo-madrid. before the delivery of the trial judgment, mr. gallardo-madrid
fled the country. the parties agreed that he had absconded. ms. kiran sought to
conduct a sentencing hearing
in absentia
. mr. kiss requested to be
removed from the record as defence counsel but accepted an appointment as
amicus to assist the court at the sentencing hearing.
findings of fact at trial
mr. tian liu and ms. jiarui lin are married.
they were walking near bathurst and dundas on the evening of november 6, 2022.
ms. lin was pregnant.
at about 6:20 pm, mr. liu saw a man walking
towards them. the man had a gun in his hand. when mr. liu and his wife were
about five metres from him, he turned around and pointed the gun at them. the
man pulled the trigger, and there was a clicking sound. however, no bullets were
fired. he then walked away.
mr. liu believed his life was in danger. ms. lin
observed the man pointing the firearm at her and her husband but was unsure of
his specific target. the entire incident only lasted four or five seconds, but
it frightened her.
mr. gallardo-madrid was arrested shortly
thereafter. the police located the firearm. it was an unloaded bb gun. it
looked very realistic, and could be easily confused with a handgun.
during the trial, i heard testimony from dr. s.
cohen, a forensic psychiatrist at the centre for addiction and mental health
(“camh”). i accepted dr. cohen’s evidence and concluded that mr.
gallardo-madrid was experiencing a drug-induced psychosis at the time of the
offences. he was unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of his actions. he
admitted to dr. cohen that he had used marijuana in the days prior. however, i
also found that the defence failed to establish the defence of not criminally
responsible (“ncr”) because the cause of mr. gallardo-madrid’s psychosis was
due to voluntary drug consumption rather than an underlying major mental
illness:
r. v. gallardo-madrid
,
2025 oncj 378
.
victim impact statements
mr. liu described feeling “overwhelmed by fear”
for his life and that of his pregnant wife. the psychological impact of these
events has been significant. he suffers from anxiety and struggles with
sleeping. he no longer feels safe walking in public. his daily life is
dominated by fear and stress.
he and his wife moved away from downtown toronto
because they no longer felt safe there. this caused financial hardship for
their family.
when the man aimed the gun at her, ms. lin
thought she might be killed. she felt helpless and terrified. she was not only
worried about her own life but also about the baby she was carrying. she also
experiences anxiety and does not feel safe outside her home. the sense of
security she once relied on has been shattered. she feels “deep emotional harm”
from what happened.
mr. gallardo-madrid’s prior history of
drug-induced psychosis
mr. gallardo-madrid had an extensive history of
treatment for psychotic episodes caused by drug use, which was reviewed at the
trial. the key parts of that history relevant to my sentencing decision may be
summarized as follows.
march 21, 2021
mr. gallardo-madrid attended the st. michael’s
emergency department. he was taken into custody by police earlier that day for
threatening to kill himself by jumping from the cn tower. a code white alert
was issued due to his behaviour. physical and chemical restraints were
necessary to protect hospital staff. a former roommate reported that he had
been involved in physical altercations with his roommates recently, and he was making
strange utterances. he had been consuming cannabis daily.
may 28, 2021
mr. gallardo-madrid was evaluated at toronto
general hospital. he was taken to the emergency department while in police
custody. he had been causing damage at his residence and was aggressive with
the police. he reported using cannabis.
june 2-10, 2021
university of toronto campus security contacted
the toronto police service about a report of a man acting in an agitated manner
at a nearby grocery store. mr. gallardo-madrid attempted to assault a security
guard. he was incoherent when located. he spat and kicked wildly while in the
police cruiser. at the emergency department, he required physical and chemical
restraints. he also attempted to spit at staff.
he eventually reported that he had been using
cannabis regularly. he said it made him feel “crazy.” he also reported feeling
paranoid and worried that someone was trying to kill him. additionally, he
reported homicidal thoughts.
he was diagnosed with a substance-induced
psychotic disorder. concerns about drug use, including his susceptibility to
substance-induced psychosis, were discussed with him. mr. gallardo-madrid
informed the attending medical professionals that he would refrain from using
cannabis.
august 22, 2021
on august 22, 2021, he was taken to the camh
emergency department. he did not remember the reason. he felt “detached” from
reality. he remembered using cannabis beforehand. furthermore, he reported that
in may of that year, he was charged with robbery.
november 5, 2021
at the camh bridging clinic, mr. gallardo-madrid
reported he was still using cannabis. he was reminded of his diagnosis and that
the most effective treatment would be an antipsychotic medication.
camh outpatient appointments
:
various dates in 2022
on five dates in 2022, ranging from february 9
to october 30, mr. gallardo-madrid attended camh. his substance use-related
decompensation was regularly discussed. on october 30, 2022, he was diagnosed again
by a doctor as likely experiencing a substance-induced psychosis.
sentencing
in absentia
criminal code
section
720 states that a court “shall, as soon as practicable after an offender has
been found guilty, conduct proceedings to determine an appropriate sentence to
be imposed.”
criminal code
section 475 allows, but does not require, a
court to resume proceedings if the accused has absconded.
in
r. v. singh
,
2015 onsc 904
, justice
pomerance (as she then was) held that when an accused has absconded, a
sentencing court is not absolved of its responsibility to impose a sentence
that achieves the objective of proportionality. however, the sentencing court
must have sufficient information about the accused and his or her background,
experiences and personal circumstances to ensure the fundamental principle of proportionality
is respected: see paras. 11-17;
r. v. mitsakis
,
2022 onsc 5390
, at para.
17
.
given the comprehensive record filed at the
trial, the testimony of dr. cohen, and the testimony of mr. gallardo-madrid, i
am satisfied i have sufficient evidence to complete the sentencing hearing
despite the offender’s absence.
positions of the parties
ms. kiran argues that a total sentence of two
years in custody, combined with two years of probation, is appropriate. she requested
a one-year jail sentence for the assault with weapon charges (concurrent to
each other), and a one-year, consecutive sentence for the charge of using an
imitation firearm to commit an indictable offence. she contends that this disposition
adequately considers the relevant mental health issues, mr. gallardo-madrid’s
prospects for rehabilitation, and upholds the totality principle.
ms. kiran relied on several authorities to
support her position. in particular, she cited
r. v. thelusma
, an
unreported decision by justice macfarlane of the ontario court of justice,
dated january 14, 2025. the offender was convicted of pointing a firearm at his
victims and threatening to kill them. the firearm was a pellet gun.
justice macfarlane determined there were no
mental health issues contributing to the offence. despite the offender being
only 24 years old, he received a combined 16-month jail sentence.
in
r. v. doodman,
2021 onca 543
, the
offender committed a robbery of a convenience store while using an imitation
firearm. at the time of the offences, he was addicted to alcohol and drugs. the
trial judge imposed an 18-month jail sentence (reduced by six months for
downes
credit), which the court of appeal upheld.
at my request, ms. kiran also reviewed
r. v.
habib,
2024 onca 830
, where a three-year sentence was imposed on appeal for
a similar offence. ms. kiran distinguished this case on the basis that the
firearm mr. gallardo-madrid wielded was a bb gun, and not a “true” handgun. i
will comment further on
habib
later in this decision.
as
amicus
, mr. kiss submits that a
suspended sentence would be a suitable disposition. he presented the court with
numerous authorities guiding how to weigh mr. gallardo-madrid’s medical history
and mental health diagnoses. although i did not accept that mr. gallardo-madrid
had a major mental illness at the time of the offence, after the trial, mr.
kiss submits that there is evidence indicating he has since been diagnosed with
bipolar one disorder.
that should still be taken into account.
mr. gallardo was 27 years old at the time of the
offences. he came to canada from ecuador to study at the university of toronto
and was able to stay on a work permit. however, his drug use had impacted his
otherwise pro-social life. if he were to seek to return to canada in the future
and i were to impose a lengthy jail sentence, he might become criminally
inadmissible.
mr. kiss does not dispute that there is a
qualitative difference between an offender who voluntarily uses drugs and
commits crimes, and one who has a significant mental illness that they cannot
change, which in turn contributes to their criminal behaviour. in his
submission, both remain mitigating factors. if i disagree with his
recommendation and impose a custodial sentence, it should be less than six
months. that would help to prevent the collateral consequences associated with
a longer sentence as per the relevant sections of the
immigration and
refugee protection act
, s.c. 2001, c. 27. essentially, he urges me to
prioritize the principle of rehabilitation in sentencing and argues that this
case does not warrant giving undue weight to the principles of general
deterrence or denunciation due to mr. gallardo-madrid’s unique circumstances.
law and analysis
mr. gallardo-madrid was a relatively young man
when he committed these crimes. he does not have a prior criminal record. typically,
this would require a sentencing court to give considerable weight to specific
deterrence and rehabilitation as the primary applicable sentencing principles.
however, as noted by the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. mohenu,
2019 onca 291
, serious crimes of personal violence provide an
exception to this general rule. in those cases, the sentencing principles of
general deterrence and denunciation are to be given paramountcy: see para. 12.
section 718.04
of the
criminal
code
states that “[w]hen a court imposes a sentence for an offence that
involved the abuse of a person who is vulnerable because of personal
circumstances – including because the person is aboriginal and female — the
court shall give primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and
deterrence of the conduct that forms the basis of the offence.” mr. liu and ms.
lin were completely defenceless at the time they were assaulted. they were
highly vulnerable individuals.
furthermore, section 718.2(a)(iii.1) deems it an
aggravating factor that an offence had a “significant impact on the victim.”
the victim impact statements reflect the lasting psychological harm to both ms.
lin and mr. liu.
the fundamental principle of
sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence committed and the moral blameworthiness of the offender: see
criminal
code
section 718.1;
r. v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
, at para.
4
. the supreme court of canada, in
r. v.
hills
,
2023 scc 2
, held that the gravity of the offence “should be measured
by taking into account the consequences of the offender’s actions on victims
and public safety, and the physical and psychological harms that flowed from
the offence”: see para. 58.
the seriousness of these offences cannot be
overstated. mr. gallardo-madrid aimed a realistic-looking imitation firearm at
two innocent people calmly going about their business in downtown toronto. they
were understandably terrified for their lives. in a city often plagued by gun
violence, this offence must be condemned. even worse, mr. gallardo-madrid
pulled the trigger while pointing the firearm at his victims, causing them to
believe they were about to be shot with a real gun. such an experience would be
utterly terrifying for anyone. it was cruel.
in
hills
,
the supreme court of canada held
that an offender’s moral culpability or degree of responsibility “should be
measured by gauging the essential substantive elements of the offence including
the offence’s mens rea, the offender’s conduct in the commission of the
offence, the offender’s motive for committing the offence, and aspects of the
offender’s background that increase or decrease the offender’s individual
responsibility for the crime, including the offender’s personal circumstances
and mental capacity”: see para. 58.
mr. gallardo-madrid’s moral culpability for
these offences must be considered in light of the fact that he was acutely
psychotic at the time he committed them, as i will explain. however, the
objective seriousness of his crimes still reflects on that moral culpability.
in
r. v. roberts
,
2020 abca 434
, the alberta court of appeal stated that
“the most important element in assessing moral culpability is the unlawful act
itself”: see para. 36. mr. gallardo-madrid was also entirely aware of the risks
involved in choosing to consume marijuana, given his history of
hospitalizations in 2021 and 2022. in
r. v. c.k
.,
2023 bcca 468
, the
british columbia court of appeal emphasized that an offender’s “awareness of
the actual or
reasonably foreseeable harms
flowing from their conduct”
is also a significant factor to consider: see para. 71 (my emphasis added).
aggravating and mitigating factors
the aggravating factors in this case are
numerous. the victims were entirely innocent, law-abiding citizens walking
peacefully to their home. they were completely defenceless when mr.
gallardo-madrid attacked them. he was armed. ms. lin was pregnant. the firearm
was pointed at them at point-blank range. mr. gallardo-madrid pulled the
trigger.
there are a few mitigating factors. mr.
gallardo-madrid is an educated man who has enjoyed steady employment. he
appeared articulate and intelligent during the trial, before absconding. he
does not have a prior criminal record. presumably, his rehabilitative potential
would be significant.
drug-induced psychosis
mr. gallardo-madrid was experiencing
drug-induced psychosis when he committed the offences. dr. cohen’s expert
opinion was that mr. gallardo-madrid was “acutely psychotic at the material
time, thus robbing him of rational choice, and thus could not meaningfully
appreciate the wrongfulness of his actions.”
however, dr. cohen also concluded that mr. gallardo-madrid did not suffer from
a longstanding major mental illness.
it is normally a mitigating factor that an
accused, while in a drug-induced psychosis brought upon by the voluntary
consumption of an intoxicating substance, committed offences. mr.
gallardo-madrid was not thinking rationally at the time he assaulted mr. liu
and ms. lin.  yet, that does not excuse or justify his actions, and the weight
i assign to this mitigating factor must be carefully considered and should not
be presumed: see
r. v. jarvis
,
2022 onca 7
, at para.
8
.
in my assessment, mr. gallardo-madrid exhibited
a very high level of moral culpability for his actions, despite being in a
drug-induced psychosis. this was not his first time experimenting with drugs.
as i previously reviewed, he has an extensive history of treatment at toronto hospitals
for this condition. he was aware that using marijuana could trigger a dangerous
psychotic episode, having previously behaved violently after consuming that drug.
nonetheless, he continued to use cannabis in the days leading up to november 6,
2022.
mr. gallardo-madrid’s psychiatric history was
closely tied to his substance use issues, including significant cannabis and
psilocybin use. he made multiple emergency and inpatient visits to st.
michael’s emergency department, toronto general emergency department, and the
centre for addiction and mental health due to psychotic episodes linked to drug
use. the mitigating effect of drug-induced psychosis is greatly reduced when a
person has been warned about the risks of using a particular drug (including
the risk that he might behave dangerously or violently) and chooses to ignore
those warnings. mr. gallardo-madrid had a documented history of violence
related to substance use before november 6, 2022. his choice to continue using
marijuana for days despite this history was made with reckless disregard for
the likely outcome that he would have an adverse reaction, become dysregulated
or unpredictable, and possibly harm others. this increases his moral
culpability beyond that of a first-time drug user who may not fully understand
the risks of abnormal behaviour associated with illicit substances: see
r.
v. moss,
2024 abkb 371
, at para.
60
;
r. v. langevin
,
2018 onsc 6020
, at paras.
58-60
.
in
roberts
,
supra
, the appellant stabbed
two innocent victims to death in their home. he pleaded guilty to two counts of
manslaughter committed during a home invasion. expert testimony presented to
the court concluded that mr. roberts was in a psychotic state at the time of
the killings, due to self-induced methamphetamine and cannabis intoxication. the
trial judge sentenced him to 15 years. the court of appeal of alberta held that
the trial judge had placed undue weight on the mitigating impact of his drug
consumption on his moral culpability and increased the sentence to 20 years.
the court of appeal noted that mr. roberts “was
aware of the link between his consumption of alcohol and drugs and his
resulting violence. his propensity for violence when
consuming alcohol or drugs was well demonstrated” based on prior experiences,
including several when he had been violent against his own family members: see
para. 21. the court wrote the following at para. 41:
the sentencing
judge’s approach treated the psychosis as a neutral factor, failing to account
for the reasons why and the circumstances in which roberts found himself in a
psychotic state. his psychosis was not due to mental illness, nor did mental
illness contribute to his psychosis. his psychotic state was induced purely by
his decision to ingest a combination of narcotics. this was not a case of a
youthful offender who entered a psychotic state unintentionally through
experimentation. roberts had previously induced his psychotic states and knew
that, when psychotic, he had a propensity for violence. while he may not have
intended to kill, he was wilfully blind to the fact that his actions, in
choosing to ingest intoxicants to the degree of triggering a psychotic state, may
well cause him to act violently and erratically.
similar sentiments were conveyed by the british
columbia court of appeal in
r. v. green
,
2001 bcca 672
. the appellant,
while on a crack cocaine binge, killed a female friend. he was convicted of
manslaughter and received a seven-year prison sentence. he had a history of
cocaine use that significantly affected his behaviour. however, he did not have
a prior criminal record, nor was there a documented history of previous violent
conduct. on appeal, the appellant argued that because he was not aware of his
actions at the time he killed the victim, he was entitled to a reduced
sentence. the court of appeal disagreed. while recognizing that the crime was
less aggravating because he was unaware of his actions, the court of appeal
stated the following at para. 19:
in the present
case, general deterrence and denunciation are the most important factors in
determining the proper sentence. i do not accept the argument that deterrence
is not a significant factor because people on cocaine binges are unaware of
their conduct and cannot be deterred. in my opinion, deterrence is not aimed at
violence per se, but is aimed at the highly irresponsible conduct that leads to
the violence. those who might emulate the lifestyle of the appellant that led
to the killings must know that serious crimes done while under the influence of
self-administered, mind-altering substances will attract substantial terms of
imprisonment: the more horrific the circumstances of the crime, the higher the
sentence.
conclusion
when sentencing a first-time offender, the
principle of restraint demands that a sentencing court consider “all sanctions
apart from incarceration, especially for first offenders”: see
r. v. ali,
2022
onca 736
, at para.
40
. if custody is to be imposed, it should be for the least
amount of time necessary: see
r. v. hamilton
,
2004 canlii 5549
(ont.
c.a.), at para.
96
. the principle of restraint is now codified in
sections
718.2
(d) and (e) of the
criminal code
. and i must ensure that the
overall sentence for an offender who receives consecutive sentences for
multiple offences does not exceed his moral culpability: see
criminal code
section 718.2(c).
mr. gallardo-madrid’s choice to abscond
demonstrates outright contempt for the administration of justice. little weight
is to be placed on the sentencing principle of rehabilitation for someone who
has shown an unwillingness to respect the court’s authority: see
r. v. p.m
.,
2022 onca 408
, at para.
22
. mr. gallardo-madrid certainly cannot be credited with
any potential remorse for his actions, as he is not here to address the court. i
recognize that absconding is not by itself necessarily an aggravating factor:
see
singh
, supra,
at para.
19
;
r v. eggleton,
2023 onsc 5724
, at
para.
16
. rather, it may negate or minimize the value attached to certain
mitigating factors and justify the court placing an enhanced emphasis on specific
deterrence: see
r. v. sithravel,
2023 onca 748
, at para.
5
;
eggleton
at para.
47
.
nevertheless, sentencing courts must send a
strong message that those who commit violent crimes with firearms will face
significant punishments upon conviction. as justice nishikawa recently noted in
r. v. riahi
,
2025 onsc 4957
, the “courts have repeatedly condemned the
menace that the criminal possession of handguns poses to society and the need
for sentences to further the goals of denunciation, deterrence and protection
of the public”: see para. 42. while a bb gun is not nearly as objectively
dangerous to public safety as a prohibited or restricted “true” firearm capable
of firing live rounds of ammunition, the impact of mr. gallardo’s crimes on his
victims was profound. to them, the firearm appeared real, and the fear they
experienced was just as psychologically traumatic as if it were real.
given a long history of drug use followed by
psychotic episodes that led to violent acts, and warnings from medical
professionals that he should stop using marijuana, i do not find that mr.
gallardo-madrid’s moral culpability for these offences is significantly
diminished despite being in an acutely psychotic state at the time. indeed, to
repeat, i find his moral culpability to be extremely high. he knowingly and
recklessly endangered every member of the public by arming himself before setting
out to needlessly threaten anyone he encountered: see
moss
, supra,
at
para.
61
;
r. v. itil
,
2019 onsc 6532
, at para.
27
.
in
habib
, the appellant impulsively
brandished a handgun during an altercation with a pizza store employee who had
refused to serve him. the employee fled the store in fear. three bystanders were
present at the time. the appellant was only 19 years of age at the time. the
court of appeal for ontario overturned the trial judge’s sentence of four years
and reduced it to three years, to better reflect his reduced maturity. the
court noted, however, that had the appellant been older and more mature, a
greater sentence would have been appropriate. the court compared mr. habib to
the offender in
r. v. samaniego
,
2020 onca 439
, aff’d on other grounds,
2022 scc 9
, who, at 25 years old, received a four-year sentence for a very
similar offence: see
habib
, supra,
at paras.
56-7
. in
samaniego,
the
offender threatened a security guard at a nightclub by showing him a gun he had
concealed in his waistband.
after careful reflection, i find that the
crown’s position is justified. it recognizes the seriousness of these offences,
the significant harm inflicted on the victims, the ongoing issue of firearms
violence in this city, and mr. gallardo-madrid’s high level of moral
culpability. it accurately considers his history of being hospitalized for
acting violently while in a drug-induced state, and the warnings he previously
received from medical professionals regarding the dangers of using marijuana.
the citizens of this city deserve to know they
can enjoy themselves peacefully without being subject to random acts of
abhorrent, violent crime. i reiterate and highlight the words of the british
columbia court of appeal in
green
that offenders who choose to consume
mind-altering substances and then commit horrific offences must understand that
they will face “substantial terms of imprisonment”: see para. 19. as justice goldstein similarly
noted in
r. v. starostin
,
2023 onsc 367
, general deterrence should be
given significant weight in the sentencing process for an offender who
recklessly consumes an intoxicating substance resulting in violent behaviour.
this is especially true when the offender has been given multiple opportunities
to address their substance abuse issues, and has been made aware of their
capacity for violence when intoxicated, but has failed to do so: see para. 48.
mr. gallardo-madrid was a 27-year-old educated
man at the time he committed his offences. that stands in stark contrast to the
appellant in
habib
, who was an impulsive teenager. however, he wielded a
bb gun, not a prohibited or restricted firearm. i impose a one-year jail
sentence on the assault with a weapon charges, to be served concurrently with
each other. the sentence for using an imitation firearm to commit an indictable
offence must be served consecutively to any other punishment imposed for an
offence arising from the same events: see
criminal code
sections
85(2)(a) and
(4)
. on count 3 of the information, i impose a one-year jail
sentence, to run consecutively to the sentence for the assault with a weapon
charges. the total sentence is therefore two years in prison.
having decided that a penitentiary sentence is
necessary, i need not further comment on the alternative argument presented by
mr. kiss that a conditional sentence order would be appropriate.
in addition, i impose a two-year probation
order. the terms of probation will include that mr. gallardo-madrid have no
contact with the victims and stay 500 metres away from them at all times. he is
also prohibited from possessing any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
,
including any pellet guns, bb guns or imitation firearms.
i impose a section 109 order for ten years and a
dna order for all three offences.
the victim fine surcharges are imposed.
while mr. gallardo-madrid is in custody serving
this sentence, he is ordered to have no contact with the victims:
criminal
code
section 743.21.
released:  september 23, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
testimony of dr. jain at the trial.
testimony of dr. cohen during the trial.
assault with a weapon (
criminal code
section 267(a)) is primary
designated offence. using an imitation firearm to commit an indictable offence
(
criminal code
section 85(2)) is a secondary designated offence.