ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dimillo
, 2025 oncj 170
date:
2025 03 28
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 23 47102956
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
frank dimillo
reasons
for judgment
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on february 18-21, 26, and march 18-19, 26-27, 2025
reasons
released on march 28, 2025
sean doherty....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ian mccuaig............................................................ counsel
for the accused frank dimillo
garg j.:
overview
blake dimillo told the police that he heard his
father confess to shooting a man in the face. he then testified in court that
he misspoke. the purported confession is the only direct evidence against the
accused. the alleged victim of the shooting did not incriminate the accused.
i find that blake dimillo told the truth to the
police and gave a reliable account of what he heard. his recounting of the
accused’s confession combines with the circumstantial evidence to prove the
accused’s responsibility for the shooting beyond a reasonable doubt. these
reasons explain my conclusions.
general
principles
the crown bears the onus of proving each and
every element of the offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt. the accused
carries no onus to prove or disprove anything. he is presumed innocent of all
charges. the burden of proof never shifts to the accused. it is not enough for
me to believe that the accused is probably or likely guilty of an offence. in
that situation, i would need to acquit. while the crown is not required to
prove its case to an absolute certainty, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls
much closer to an absolute certainty than the balance of probabilities.
reasonable doubt can arise from the evidence or from the absence of evidence.
the crown presents a largely circumstantial case
to prove that the accused intentionally shot the alleged victim, morgan
richardson. i must conduct an analysis pursuant to the principles articulated
in
r. v. villaroman
,
2016 scc 33
. i must consider other reasonable
possibilities or plausible theories that are inconsistent with guilt to decide
whether an inference of guilt is the only reasonable inference. reasonable
possibilities must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or
the absence of evidence. “[i]t is for the trier of fact to determine whether
any proposed alternative way of looking at the case as a whole is reasonable
enough to raise a doubt about the guilt of the accused”:
r. v. lights
,
2020 onca 128
at para.
39
.
blake dimillo’s statement to the police
after considering the entire trial record, i
find as fact that blake dimillo heard the accused’s purported confession to the
shooting. the accused was speaking to visitors on the porch of his home. i find
that blake properly recounted what he heard to the police.
i reject blake’s testimony
that he misspoke.
factual overview
blake gave a statement to the police on the day following
the alleged shooting. i granted the crown’s application to admit the following excerpt
of blake’s statement into evidence for the truth of its contents:
blake:  … i went downstairs to ask [the
accused] like, just basically what the fuck is wrong with him? why is he
involving us? like, this isn’t, like, it’s not safe, obviously. but he was out.
so, i talked …
officer:  what time did that
[indiscernible] at roughly?
blake:  that was around 6:30. and that’s when
i talked to chantel. that’s when i found out from her. because she was
sleeping. but i woke her up. and i said like, i wanted to hear her point of
view. because i had angie’s. so i wanted to hear what was going on from her.
and then he came upstairs around, i wanna say eight o’clock, nine o’clock. and
he, um, he asked me if i knew what happened and i was like, yeah. i was like,
what do you want me to say? like, you’re a fucking idiot. like, if they
question me, like i’m gonna tell them the truth, type thing. and um, he, uh, he
had a couple friends come over. um, i don’t know them, but it was just, it was
just people. um, i’m assuming he was trying to cover it up, trying to get
things situated. but i didn’t have any involvement in that. i didn’t leave my
room, didn’t really hear anything. i heard he told, he told someone about what
happened. i didn’t see the person, cause it’s hard to explain, cause you didn’t
go inside, but it's like when you come outta my room, you look in the kitchen
at the back door, there’s like a pillar. like the doorway. so i couldn’t see
him, but i could see my dad explaining it and i could hear …
officer:  what was he saying?
blake:  just saying that he shot him, like
he shot him in the face.
officer:  he was telling the person that he
shot him in the face.
blake:  yeah. i don’t know who the person
was, but he was telling someone. it was one of his friends.
officer:  was he like detailing what it,
what it, what had happened?
blake:  he said that he shot him in the cheek,
went through and up through his ear. i don’t, he seemed kind of proud about it,
but that’s why i’m being completely truthful. i, it doesn’t [indiscernible] …
officer:  i can’t tell you how, how much we
appreciate, uh, you telling the truth. um, because it just makes it easier for
everybody. easier on you, easier on us. even ultimately easier on your dad in
the sense that you, you know, you’re not getting into these lies, trying to
spin stories or anything like that. i mean, it’s, it’s, it’s one of those
things where the truth is always gonna be the best, the best route, right?
blake:  he’s my dad. like, i get the whole
protecting, but there’s nothing to protect. like, this was just a very stupid
decision he made. and i knew that eventually he was gonna end up in jail or
dead. so i just, i’d rather him be in jail right, can at least still see him.
but, it is what it is.
at trial, blake recanted his recounting of the
confession. when asked what the accused had said, blake testified:
i heard his tone of voice. i could hear
mumbling and like i could hear his voice, but i couldn’t make out exactly what
he was saying. i picked up some words through the glass window in our kitchen.
when asked what words he heard, blake
testified:
nothing specific, like, “the” and “at”.
blake later added:
… i heard his voice, but i didn’t pick up
any words. i was going based off what i had heard from other people that day,
and based on his hand gestures, not his hand gestures, his motions. i didn’t
hear specific words. i misspoke in this statement.
blake testified that he was highly emotional when
speaking with the police. he was also angry at the accused for leading a
drug-filled lifestyle that caused chaos and disruption to the household. he
agreed with defence counsel’s initial suggestion that he recounted the
information that he had received from third parties, and not what he had heard
from the accused.
the crown put to blake that his recounting to
the police of the accused’s confession was unequivocal—he did not say that he
assumed or inferred that the accused was confessing.
blake responded:
the statement i made there [to the police]
and the statement i gave you [in court] was a clarified version of what i
meant, and i understand that i didn’t say “i think” or “i assume”, but that is
what i meant by “i misspoke” in that statement. that day was a very rough day
and if i forgot to say, “i think”, i apologize. but that’s what i meant by
today when i told you i misspoke, and that’s what i actually meant.
…
i could hear [the accused’s] voice, but not
his words, which is what i said earlier, which is what i should have told the
detective, but it was a pretty busy day.
analysis
i rely on blake’s statement wherein he detailed the
accused’s purported confession. i will explain why i prefer the content of this
statement over the in-court recantation. this conclusion requires me to accept
parts of blake’s evidence and reject others, which i am entitled to do:
r.
v. s.h.
,
2011 onca 215
at para.
8
.
substitutes for the oath or affirmation
blake testified under solemn affirmation whereas
his statement to police was unsworn. i nevertheless decline to view his statement
as inherently less trustworthy. there was no real challenge to blake’s
testimony that he was truthful with the police when giving his statement, he
understood the consequences of lying, he knew that his statement would have
consequences for the accused, he knew that his statement was being recorded,
and he knew that his statement would be used as evidence in the police investigation.
concerns with blake’s credibility at trial
i have concerns with blake’s testimonial credibility.
i find that he did not give frank evidence and dealt in half-truths.
blake’s efforts to distance himself from his
statement undermined his credibility. blake initially testified that he only heard
the accused say “the” and “at” when talking to the visitors. when refreshed on
his statement, blake went further and testified that he did not hear
any
specific words. often, little will turn on a witness changing their evidence
after refreshing their memory. but the change in this case undermines blake’s
credibility. since the relevant portion of the statement was admitted for its
truth, i know what blake reviewed to refresh his memory. it does not make sense
that blake testified to hearing two specific words, reviewed a statement where
he recounted a confession, and then changed his evidence to be that he did not
hear any specific words at all. i find that blake was trying to distance
himself from his statement.
another instance of blake trying to distance
himself from the statement involves his opportunity to hear the accused. blake
initially testified that he heard the accused speaking through a glass window. i
understood this to mean that there was no other opening between blake and the
accused. but under cross-examination, blake was shown images from inside the
home. the images reveal that there is a doorway right next to the window.
i find it strange that blake
volunteered hearing the accused through the window but did not mention the
doorway until shown the images.
the doorway must have provided an opportunity for blake to hear the accused
since he also testified that the door was partially open. i find that blake’s initial
focus on hearing the accused through a closed window was an attempt to limit
his opportunity to hear the confession.
defence counsel argued that blake’s testimony about
the position of the door enhanced his credibility. if blake wanted to fully
distance himself from the confession, then he could have testified that the
door was completely shut. this argument only goes so far. it is not as though
blake testified unequivocally that the door was open. he gave shifting evidence
on the issue. when it was initially suggested to him that the door was closed,
blake testified that he did not recall and did not think that the door was
closed. when later asked whether the door was open or closed, he responded
“closed i believe? maybe closed a third of the way”. he then testified that the
door was “not fully closed but shut”. in re-examination, blake resisted the
suggestion that items in front of the door were propping it wide open, despite this
being the setup the day after the confession.
there are other examples of blake modifying his
testimony in a manner that undermines his testimonial credibility. he initially
testified that the police, when executing the search warrant, invited everyone
to leave the house. but he later agreed that the police “dragged” him out, and
that both he and his grandmother were “pulled” out. in re-examination, blake acknowledged
that neither he nor his grandmother were dragged or pulled out of the house.
his explanation for agreeing with defence counsel’s suggestions did not
rehabilitate his credibility. for example, when asked why he went along with the
word “pulled”, blake shrugged his shoulders.
finally, i find that blake was motivated to tell
the truth to the police and motivated to recant that truth at trial. blake
admitted at trial that he loved the accused and did not want him to go to jail
for a long period of time. these are perfectly normal feelings for a son to
have for his father. but it nonetheless gave blake a motive to recant the
confession. by contrast, i find that blake’s emotional state at the time of the
statement, including his anger, motivated him to tell the truth. he told the
truth in view of what he considered to be his father’s best interests at the
time. as blake told the police, “… this was just a very stupid decision he
made. and i knew that eventually he was gonna end up in jail or dead. so i
just, i’d rather him be in jail right, can at least still see him”. it makes
sense that, come trial two years later, blake no longer thought that jail was
the best place for his father: see
r. v. laboucan
,
2010 scc 12
at para.
11
.
precise language
and limited tainting concern
another reason that i give full weight to
blake’s statement rests on the precision of his language in the statement.
relatedly, i am not concerned that his account was simply a regurgitation of
what he had heard from third parties or otherwise tainted by earlier
conversations. it is convenient to address these points together.
first, blake was unequivocal in his statement
that he heard the accused confess to the shooting. even if the police
did not instruct blake to confine himself to things that he personally saw and
heard, the statement shows that blake chose his words carefully. he told the
police when he was sharing an assumption (“
i’m assuming
he was
trying to cover it up”). he shared that he received the perspectives of angie
and chantel. he indicated unknowns (like who the accused was speaking to). and
when it came to recounting the confession, he squarely put the words in the
accused’s mouth: “
i could see my dad explaining it
and i could hear
… just saying that he shot him, like he shot him in the face. …
he said
that he shot him
in the cheek, went through and up through his ear”.
when sharing this last portion with the police, blake used his hand to
demonstrate the path of the bullet.
second, blake testified that he “misspoke” in his statement because
he did not actually hear the accused utter specific words. if blake falsely put
a complete confession in the accused’s mouth, then he did not misspeak. he
outright fabricated his account. blake’s effort to thread the
needle—maintaining he was truthful with the police and only misspoke—did not
succeed. i note that blake only proffered chantel as the source of the details
in his statement when pressed on the stark contrast between that statement and
his testimony. examined holistically, i reject blake’s explanation that he
misspoke.
he did not fabricate his account to the police.
third, the evidence at trial limited the
tainting concern. in his statement, blake gave details about what he heard the
accused say, including the path of the bullet. at trial, blake confirmed that
he did not receive detailed accounts of the shooting from angie or chantel. on
the final day of his testimony, blake explained that angie did not really
describe the alleged incident but was angrily complaining about the accused’s
behaviour. as for chantel, blake explained that she gave an angry rant and shared
her grievances in a stream of consciousness. she did not give a step-by-step
account of what had supposedly occurred.
information that the accused had “acted badly” is different from receiving a
specific account that blake then parroted to the police. while i cannot discount
the tainting possibility altogether, examined in context, it does not prevent
me from relying on blake’s statement.
ability to hear
the accused
i am satisfied that blake could hear the
accused. the photographs show that blake was not far away when he heard the
accused speaking. an open doorway allowed sound to pass through. i accept blake’s
testimony that the door was not
closed enough to block sound from the
outside.
opportunity to
hear the accused
defence counsel cautioned me from putting weight
on blake’s statement because it only captured a snippet of the accused’s
conversation. clearly some context is missing. blake was not a party to the
conversation. his statement does not outline what questions, if any, led the
accused to recount the shooting.
i nonetheless have sufficient context to rely on
blake’s recounting of the conversation. blake could both see and hear the
accused speaking. he was not far away. he knew that the accused was speaking to
someone else. implicit in blake’s recounting is that the accused spoke loud
enough to be heard. and the core portion was not presented as a partial
thought: see
r. v. buttazzoni
,
2019 onca 645
at para.
56
. when the officer
asked if the accused had
detailed
the event, blake attributed specific
details to the accused: “he said that he shot him in the cheek, went through
and up through his ear. … he seemed kind of proud about it”.
corroborative evidence makes it more likely that
the accused was talking about the shooting of mr. richardson. it also gives me comfort
that blake both accurately heard the accused and accurately recounted what he
heard to the police. blake recounted the accused giving details about the path of
the bullet—in through the cheek and out through the ear. the photographs of mr. richardson
show him with an obvious wound to his cheek and another behind his ear. i find
that this second wound is close enough to the ear to match the accused’s utterance.
to understand the force of this corroboration,
it helps to consider a contrary scenario. if blake had attributed to the
accused details that were fundamentally different from mr. richardson’s
shooting, it would suggest at least two possibilities: either the accused was
talking about a different shooting altogether, or blake misheard the accused.
but since the utterance matches the injuries, it makes it more likely that
blake accurately heard the accused talking about mr. richardson’s shooting—even
if his recounting of the conversation was not presented as a direct quote.
finally, i reject as implausible blake’s
testimony that he was only in position to hear the accused for a total of three
seconds. i find that blake saw and heard the accused discussing the shooting. his
testimony that he only listened for three seconds was another attempt to
distance himself from his statement.
blake’s demeanor
when giving the statement
i must be cautious when relying on blake’s
demeanour during the statement. i do not know how blake ordinarily presents
when he is calm versus when he is rattled. but i am entitled to put some weight
on his demeanour. it is one reason that a
k.g.b.
statement must ordinarily
be videotaped. from the admissible portion of the statement, i see a mature
young man who presented his account authentically and dispassionately.
conclusion
i find as fact that the accused told the visitor
that he shot someone in the face. the conversation occurred during the evening
after the alleged shooting. the accused said that he shot the person in the
cheek and that the bullet went through and up through his ear. the accused
seemed proud of the shooting.
proof beyond a reasonable doubt?
the next question is whether the crown has
proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt. specifically, has the crown proven
that the accused possessed a firearm and intentionally shot mr. richardson? inferences
inconsistent with guilt do not need to arise from proven facts, as this would
put an obligation on an accused to prove facts. the specific possibilities inconsistent
with guilt that i must consider are that mr. richardson shot himself; someone
other than the accused shot mr. richardson; or the accused shot mr. richardson by
accident. counsel also advanced the possibility that mr. richardson was not even
shot.
i find that none of the alternative
possibilities are reasonably possible. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that, on may 12, 2023, the accused intentionally shot mr. richardson in the
face inside the trailer parked on his property. this inference is the only
reasonable one after considering the evidence as a whole. while defence counsel
posited alternatives to individual pieces of evidence, i find that these
alternatives do not survive consideration of the entire record: see
r. v.
j.m.h.
,
2011 scc 45
at para.
31
.
mr. richardson technically gave exculpatory
testimony. despite disavowing any knowledge of the accused, he also claimed that
the accused was innocent. i put no weight on mr. richardson’s testimony. i
reject his testimony in its entirety. it lacked any credibility. the
exculpatory aspects of his testimony do not raise a doubt. defence counsel did
not argue otherwise.
mr. richardson was shot inside the trailer
i
am satisfied that mr. richardson was shot on may 12 inside the trailer. i find
that he was shot using the gun that the police found in the accused’s basement
the next day.
there
is evidence of mr. richardson’s injuries on may 13 and 14.  mr. richardson’s
medical records from his hospital visit on may 13 were admitted on consent for
the truth of their contents. mr. richardson suffered a penetrating injury
through his left cheek and posterior neck. the penetrating injury tract was near
branches of his left external jugular vein and internal jugular vein. photographs
from may 14 depict two obvious wounds to the left side of mr. richardson’s
face. the first is a hole on his cheek; the second is a hole on his neck behind
the ear.
mr.
richardson was present on the accused’s property on the afternoon of may 12. a
cab driver picked up mr. richardson from the property. he observed that mr. richardson
was covering the left side of his face with what appeared to be a white cloth.
meanwhile, blake testified that he arrived home in the afternoon. he saw the
accused, mr. richardson, chantel, and his grandmother sue ann. he described
them as “panicked” and “frantic”. blake also saw mr. richardson holding his
cheek with a white scarf wrapped around his head.
the
police executed a search warrant inside the trailer on may 13. the police saw a
bullet hole in the wall. they cut holes in the wall without piercing the
trailer’s external shell. they located a “full metal jacket” projectile.
from
my own review of the photographs, the bullet hole was around the height of the
wounds to mr. richardson’s face. my assessment is inexact and worth little
weight. the best i can say is that the bullet hole is consistent with mr.
richardson being shot in the face, as compared to if the hole was near the
ceiling or the floor.
the
police also searched inside the accused’s home. when searching the basement,
they located a bag hidden on ductwork near the ceiling. they found a .357
magnum revolver inside the bag. the projectile behind the trailer wall could
have fired from the gun (i.e., the projectile was compatible with the gun). the
police also found a spent casing loose in the bag with the gun. this casing
could have housed the projectile behind the trailer wall (it was also compatible).
the
cfs swabbed flaked staining on the left side of the gun. the swab detected
blood and dna from at least two people, including at least one male. the blood
stain provided one dna profile suitable for comparison, labelled as “str
profile 1”. mr. richardson could not be excluded as the source of this profile.
the str dna results are estimated to be greater than one trillion times more
likely if str profile 1 originated from mr. richardson than if it originated
from an unknown person unrelated to mr. richardson.
the
cfs also found blood on a paper manual that was somewhere in the trailer. the
swab of the staining contained dna from two people, including at least one
male. the str dna results are estimated to be greater than one trillion times
more likely if mr. richardson contributed to the mixture, and 660,000 times
more likely if the accused was the other contributor. the expert testified that
it was more likely that the blood originated from mr. richardson because he
contributed more dna to the mixture.
i draw the inference that the gun was used in the shooting. it was
compatible with the projectile found in the trailer and found in a bag with a
casing that was also compatible with the projectile. furthermore, mr.
richardson’s blood was on the gun. it is implausible that mr. richardson
suffered a penetrating wound at an unknown location, continued bleeding when he
attended a trailer in which a shooting had previously occurred, the gun was
produced for some unknown reason, and mr. richardson then bled on the gun.
rather, mr. richardson’s blood is on the gun because he was shot by the
gun.
i
respectfully reject defence counsel’s argument of there being insufficient blood
in the trailer to conclude that mr. richardson was shot there. i do not know
how much blood should be expected from a through-and-through wound that did not
hit the jugular. furthermore, sue ann testified that mr. richardson already had
a cloth with him when he arrived that day, which the cab driver later saw
wrapped around mr. richardson’s face. the driver did not testify to copious
bleeding inside his vehicle. from the evidence before me, it would seem as
though mr. richardson was able to contain much of the bleeding. in any event, the
absence of abundant blood is a minor issue when considering that mr. richardson’s
blood was indeed found in the trailer along with a projectile that had gone
through the wall.
the accused intentionally shot mr. richardson
in the face
i am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused was the shooter.
the accused had the opportunity to commit the
shooting. the evidence puts him on the property around the time when mr.
richardson was shot. the evidence also discloses a limited number of people on
the property that morning or afternoon.
the accused’s bedroom was in the same basement
where the police found the gun used in the shooting.
the accused’s dna was on the gun. two dna
profiles suitable for comparison were located on the gun. a swab of the
textured areas (i.e., the grip, hammer, and button) detected the dna from one
male, labelled as “str profile 2”. the accused could not be excluded as the
source of this profile. the str dna results are estimated to be greater than
one trillion times more likely if str profile 2 originated from the accused
than if it originated from an unknown person unrelated to the accused. the cfs
expert used plain language in his testimony: “it’s essentially inconceivable to
me that this dna profile, str profile 2, would originate from anyone other than
[the accused], including family members … this is an unambiguous dna profile
with information at all of the available testing locations”.
the crown adds that the cfs only found the dna
of the accused and mr. richardson on the gun. if someone else had shot mr.
richardson, then they did so without leaving their dna. i accept defence
counsel’s warning to be cautious with this submission. the crown did not ask
the expert about the likelihood of someone firing the gun without leaving their
dna. at its highest, there is simply an absence of anyone else’s dna on the
gun.
finally, the accused said that he fired a gun
and shot someone in the face. i find that the accused must have been referring
to shooting mr. richardson. i draw this inference given that he made the statement
on the same day that a shooting occurred inside his trailer. furthermore, his
description of the shooting—in the face, in the cheek—matches the injuries
suffered by mr. richardson. the accused knew these details because he was present.
based on my assessment of the entire evidentiary record, i find that the
accused was confessing to the shooting.
the defence argued that the accused might have confessed
to the shooting without being responsible for it. mr. richardson was unpopular,
and for whatever reason, the accused might have wanted to take credit for his
injury. this argument calls for speculation. i do not give effect to it.
finally, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the shooting was intentional. blake described how the accused
“seemed kind of proud” about the shooting. blake’s opinion that the accused was
proud is a “compendious statement of facts that are too subtle and too
complicated to be narrated separately and distinctly”:
r. v. walker
,
2025 onca 19
at para.
18
, citing
r. v. graat
,
1982 canlii 33 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 819 at
841.
i find that the accused was
proud of what happened because he knew what he was doing and accomplished his
intended result of shooting mr. richardson. the manner of the confession, including
the accused’s emotional state, leaves the only reasonable inference that the
shooting was intentional.
on the evidence before me, a theory that the accused
shot mr. richardson by accident is speculative. the crown is not required to
negative fanciful conjecture:
villaroman
at para.
37
; see also
r. v.
epp
,
2022 onca 613
at para.
3
.
absence of evidence
defence counsel emphasized the absence of
evidence in this case. the accused bore no burden to establish any facts, much
less prove his innocence. the absence of evidence included the limited forensic
analysis, such as the absence of a gunshot residue analysis. furthermore, the cfs
analyst could not opine on when the dna was deposited.
the absence of evidence does not give me any
doubt about the accused’s guilt. the question is not whether the crown failed
to call evidence that it might have called in a different case. the question is
whether guilt is the only reasonable conclusion after considering the full
trial record and the absence of evidence. in this case, any questions that
might have remained after considering the circumstantial evidence were answered
by adding the accused’s confession to the equation.
findings of guilt
having concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused intentionally shot mr. richardson in the face, the question becomes
what verdict to render on each count. the answer seemed straightforward. at
first blush, i agreed with the concession made during submissions that findings
of guilt would flow on all charges. but upon closer review, i questioned
whether guilty verdicts were appropriate on some counts. i reconvened the
parties to make submissions with respect to counts 1 and 4.
counts 2-3, 5-9
i enter guilty verdicts on the following counts:
•
count 2: point firearm. there is no issue that
the gun was a “firearm”. the accused necessarily pointed the firearm at mr.
richardson as part of an intentional shooting.
•
count 3: discharge firearm with intent to
endanger life. this count does not require proof that mr. richardson’s life was
actually
in danger. having found that the accused intentionally shot mr.
richardson
in the face
, i draw the common sense inference that the
accused
intended
to endanger his life: see
r. v. walle
,
2012 scc
41
at para.
67
. the intent to endanger someone’s life is not the same as trying
to kill them:
r. v. owens
,
1969 canlii 964 (bc ca)
, 2 c.c.c. 38 at 47;
regina v.
boomhower
(1974),
1974 canlii 2650 (on ca)
, 27 c.r. (ns) 188 at 191. endangering life means to
put a person’s life in danger or peril:
r. v. mackinnon
,
2021 onsc 4763
at para.
770
. it is hard to conceive of how a person could intentionally shoot
someone in the face without intending to put their life in peril. more
importantly, no other explanation is available or reasonably possible in this
case. the charge is proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
•
count 5: possession of a firearm while
prohibited. the defence admitted that the accused was prohibited from
possessing firearms. it necessarily follows from the shooting that the accused
possessed the firearm.
•
count 6: careless use of a firearm. the
intentional shooting establishes the accused’s careless use of a firearm.
•
count 7: possession of a loaded prohibited or
restricted firearm. the firearm was a “restricted” firearm and obviously
loaded.
•
count 8: possession of a firearm without
registration. the accused was not registered to possess a firearm.
•
count 9: possession of a firearm knowing its
possession is unauthorized. given that the accused was prohibited from
possessing firearms, he knew that the possession was unauthorized.
count 1: aggravated assault
i enter a not guilty verdict on the count of
aggravated assault. the charge is particularized to read that the accused “did
endanger the life” of mr. richardson. there is a difference between whether the
accused intended to endanger mr. richardson’s life (count 3) and whether his
life was, in fact, in danger:
r. v. de freitas
,
1999 canlii 14071
(man.
c.a.) at paras.
15-16
;
r. v. guppy
,
2020 oncj 413
at para.
25
; see also
r. v.
tebbs
,
2022 onsc 4325
at para.
20
. i am not satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. richardson could have died. this conclusion might seem shocking
given that mr. richardson was shot through his face and the injury tract came
close to his jugular veins.
but i must consider the complete record. witnesses saw mr. richardson walking
around after the shooting and getting picked up by a cab. the cab did not take
mr. richardson to a hospital or medical clinic. mr. richardson did not seek
medical attention until the day after the shooting—and after some convincing by
the police. there is no expert opinion evidence on whether his life was in
danger.
on the contrary, mr. richardson attended the hospital with stable vitals and no
active bleeding. he was seen eating and drinking as normal. personnel explained
to mr. richardson the risks of leaving the hospital. those risks did not
include the risk of death. alternative routes to proving an aggravated assault
were available, but the crown did not seek to amend the charge.
the next issue was whether i should find the
accused guilty of a lesser included offence to aggravated assault. i initially thought
the accused would be guilty of assault causing bodily harm. but i then raised the
decision of
r. v. tenthorey
,
2021 onca 324
. as paciocco j.a. held at
para. 56: “since the fourth mode of committing aggravated assault (endangering
the life of another) can be committed without also committing an assault
causing bodily harm, assault causing bodily harm is not ‘necessarily committed
in the commission of the principal [or charged] offence’”. i cannot find the
accused guilty of assault causing bodily harm.
after hearing from counsel, however, i am satisfied
that it is proper to find the accused guilty of attempting to commit an aggravated
assault: s. 660; see also
r. v. g.r.
,
2005 scc 45
at paras.
29-31
. since
i found the accused guilty of discharging a firearm with the
intent
to
endanger mr. richardson’s life, it necessarily follows that the accused
attempted
to endanger mr. richardson’s life by committing an aggravated assault.
count 4: use
firearm while committing an aggravated assault
the count of using a firearm while committing an
aggravated assault does not particularize the route to committing the
aggravated assault (i.e., by wounding, maiming, disfiguring, or endangering
life). while the evidence fell short of proving that mr. richardson’s life was in
fact endangered, he was clearly wounded: see
r. v. pootlass
,
2019 bcca
96
at para.
3
;
mackinnon
at para.
770
. and there is no doubt that the
accused intentionally used the firearm to wound mr. richardson. i am satisfied
that the accused committed an unparticularized aggravated assault.
however, i asked counsel about the application
of the supreme court’s decision in
r. v. pringle
,
1989 canlii 65 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 1645
at 1652-1656. that decision makes clear that it is
not
sufficient for me
to find
as fact
that the accused used a firearm to commit an unparticularized
aggravated assault. rather, to enter a guilty verdict on this charge, it is
mandatory that the accused be found guilty of the underlying indictable offence.
after hearing from counsel, i accept their
position that it is nonetheless proper to find the accused guilty of this
charge. while the accused was found not guilty of aggravated assault, he was found
guilty of attempted aggravated assault. attempted aggravated assault is
necessarily included in the particularized indictable offence of aggravated
assault. the accused had fair notice that a guilty verdict could follow on
count 4 if he were found guilty of aggravated assault
or
one of its
included offences. the count reads that the accused committed an offence
contrary to s. 85(1). that section explicitly states, in subsection (b), that a
person commits an offence who uses a firearm while attempting to commit an
indictable offence.
finally, i reject the crown’s argument that i
should find the accused guilty of an unparticularized aggravated assault by
virtue of that offence being specified in count 4. to give one reason, it was
not made clear to the accused that count 4 put him in jeopardy of being found
guilty of two offences:
pringle
at 1654-1655.
conclusion
the accused is found not guilty on count 1 as
charged but found guilty of attempted aggravated assault. the accused is found
guilty as charged on counts 2 through 9.
released:  march
28, 2025
signed: justice davin m.k. garg
i use blake dimillo’s first name to distinguish him from others in his family.
r. v. dimillo
,
2025 oncj 142
. counsel confirmed that this excerpt
correctly sets out the admissible portion of the statement.
i permitted cross-examination under s. 9(2) of the
canada evidence act
.
see exhibit 10-3.
blake volunteered the information about the window and said nothing about the
open door. the crown asked: “what did you hear your father say to [the
visitors]?” blake responded: “... i picked up some words through the glass
window in our kitchen.”
see around 00:16:25 on the scroll bar of the video statement.
i reject this explanation from blake: “no, yes, it is misspeaking. what i said
there [in the statement] is not fully completely what i meant, and i didn’t
elaborate because i just, i’ll be honest, i didn’t really care to, and he didn’t
ask him more questions about it”.
this evidence conflicted with blake’s testimony on a prior day, where he agreed
that talking to angie and chantel afforded him a fairly detailed picture of the
alleged events. regardless, for the reasons provided above at paragraph 19, i
find that blake would have told the police if he was only repeating the
accounts of angie or chantel as opposed to recounting what he had heard
directly from the accused.
defence counsel took no issue with the admissibility of
blake’s opinion when i broached the issue during
submissions.
see exhibit 9, pp. 35-36.
i do not know how to decipher many of the ct findings on page 35 of the medical
records (e.g., “likely injury to a distal branch of the left transverse facial
artery, which is irregular, but without active extraversion”; “there is a large
intramuscular hematoma of the left masseter and sternocleidomastoid muscle”;
“…however note convincing intraluminal thrombus is identified”).
there is no need to address the crown’s alternative submission
that the accused could be found guilty of simple assault.