ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. singh
, 2025 oncj 730
date:
august 21, 2025
court
file no.:  brampton 998 23 31106581
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
barinder singh
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 21 august 2025
reasons
for sentence released on 21 august 2025
m. otim....................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
m. saggi........................................................... counsel
for the defendant
barinder singh
reasons for sentence
renwick j.:
introduction
following a guilty plea on 05 may 2025, i found
the offender guilty of sexual assault in his capacity (at the time) as a
ride-share driver. while driving the 20-year old complainant home after 11:00
pm, the offender stopped in a secluded area in her neighborhood, he
complimented her and asked for a hug. after receiving permission to give her a
hug, he joined the complainant in the back seat of his car, he kissed her neck
and stuck his tongue in her ear despite the lack of any attempts to obtain her
consent. initially, the offender refused to stop his sexual aggression despite the
complainant’s requests, and she fled the vehicle and had to walk home. the
prosecutor proceeded by summary conviction procedure.
originally, the parties did not anticipate a delay
until sentencing, but due to a scheduling conflict involving the offender’s
lawyer last month, the matter was adjourned to today. both parties filed
written submissions, which were helpful. both relied on sentencing decisions of
other trial courts and courts of appeal.
this was a contested sentencing hearing.
the offender filed counselling reports, a
receipt for a charitable donation, a character reference from a former teacher,
and a letter of completion of 100 hours of community service. a pre-sentence
report was also filed. lastly, i received a victim impact statement from the
complainant.
though i have read and considered all of the
materials and cases referenced, due to the short turnaround time for this
judgment, i will not detail the contents of the materials filed. suffice it to
say, for much of the materials submitted, i have reviewed them (in some cases
more than once, given the adjournment) and i have fully considered their
contents.
the prosecutor seeks a sentence of three months imprisonment
plus 18 months probation and ancillary orders. the offender seeks a suspended
sentence and probation. save for one of the ancillary orders, the offender is
content with the supervision proposed. as an alternative, if jail is the only
appropriate sentence, the offender seeks a conditional sentence of
imprisonment.
governing
sentencing principles
the fundamental purpose of sentencing as expressed in
section 718
of the
criminal code
is to contribute to respect for the law, the maintenance
of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one
or more of the objectives of denunciation, deterring the offender and other
persons from committing offences, separating offenders from society, where
necessary, assisting in rehabilitating offenders, providing reparation for harm
done to victims or to the community, and promoting a sense of responsibility in
offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
the fundamental principle of sentencing is that the punishment should be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender. the punishment should fit the crime. there is no single fit
sentence for any particular offence. the relevance and relative importance of
each of these objectives will vary according to the nature of the crime and the
circumstances of the offender.
in
r.
v
. hamilton
and mason
, doherty j.a. distilled the fundamental
principle:
the "gravity of the
offence" refers to the seriousness of the offence in a generic sense as
reflected by the potential penalty imposed by parliament and any specific
features of the commission of the crime which may tend to increase or decrease
the harm or risk of harm to the community occasioned by the offence…
the "degree of responsibility
of the offender" refers to the offender's culpability as reflected in the
essential substantive elements of the offence - especially the fault component
- and any specific aspects of the offender's conduct or background that tend to
increase or decrease the offender's personal responsibility for the crime.
the
court quoted rosenberg j.a. who had previously described the proportionality
requirement in
r.
v
. priest
:
the principle of proportionality
is rooted in notions of fairness and justice. for the sentencing court to do
justice to the particular offender, the sentence imposed must reflect the
seriousness of the offence, the degree of culpability of the offender, and the
harm occasioned by the offence. the court must have regard to the aggravating
and mitigating factors in the particular case. careful adherence to the
proportionality principle ensures that this offender is not unjustly dealt with
for the sake of the common good.
section
718.1 of the
code
ensures that proportionality is the fundamental
principle of sentencing. however, proportionality is not the sole principle to
be considered. a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
in
r.
v
.
proulx
, the supreme court spoke about the principle of restraint when
considering imprisonment:
parliament has sought to give increased prominence to
the principle of restraint in the use of prison as a sanction through the
enactment of s. 718.2(d) and (e). section 718.2(d) provides that "an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances", while s. 718.2(e) provides that
"all available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in
the circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with particular
attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders". further evidence
of parliament's desire to lower the rate of incarceration comes from other
provisions of bill c-41: s. 718(c) qualifies the sentencing objective of
separating offenders from society with the words "where necessary",
thereby indicating that caution be exercised in sentencing offenders to
prison...
the
supreme court has instructed that
section 718
requires a sentencing judge to
consider more than simply denunciation, deterrence, and rehabilitation.  the
court must also consider the restorative goals of repairing the harms suffered
by individual victims and by the community as a whole, promoting a sense of
responsibility and an acknowledgment of the harm caused by an offender, while
attempting to rehabilitate or heal the offender.
although the rehabilitation of the offender is a secondary consideration
in the overall calculus of an appropriate sentence in this case (well behind
denunciation and deterrence), it is still a factor i must consider.
mitigating
and aggravating features
there are several mitigating features worth noting:
i.
the offender is a first offender;
ii.
the offender pleaded guilty during his
arraignment on the trial date;
iii.
through his guilty plea and the submissions of
counsel, the offender demonstrated remorse and concern for the harm he has
caused the complainant and the community;
iv.
the offender enjoys the support of his wife;
v.
the offender is gainfully employed;
vi.
the offender is no longer employed as a livery
driver; and
vii.
the offender is now 31 years old and he remains
capable of rehabilitation.
the aggravating features include:
i.
a sexual offence involving the breach of trust
of a vulnerable complainant;
ii.
a sexual assault late at night when the
complainant was alone with a stranger in his vehicle, in a secluded area in her
neighborhood;
iii.
the assault only ended because the complainant
freed herself and fled; she  had to walk home, late at night, alone; and
iv.
the complainant has suffered emotionally,
socially, and psychologically from this sexual assault.
the
evidence
the psr was fairly positive. the author noted
that the offender is at a low risk to re-offend. the author noted that the
offender has gained insight into his conduct and the seriousness of the
offence.
these views are essentially echoed by the
counselling reports. the offender completed a program of eight hours respecting
sexual boundaries and appropriate conduct. he voluntarily continued counselling
for an additional six sessions. he appears to have gained tools and insight that
bode well for his complete rehabilitation. the extensive community service and
charitable donation further support the view that the offender has learned from
this experience, he is remorseful, and he wants to atone for the harm caused to
the complainant and the community. his apology through his counsel aligns with
the extrinsic evidence filed.
understandably, the complainant remains
traumatized. her victim impact statement is compelling. she is fearful and has
altered her life, quit her employment (which often required her to travel using
ride-share services to go home from work), and suffered psychological harm.
although she is young, there is no doubt that the effects of this experience
will not likely ever completely leave her consciousness.
analysis
on a continuum of sexual assaults, this is at
the low end. the assault began with a consensual hug. however, things quickly
devolved and became incredibly distressing and fear inducing for the
complainant. the offender did not listen to her requests to stop embracing her
and he continued the sexual assault. fortunately, the complainant suffered no
physical injury and her bodily integrity was minimally violated in terms of
contact and duration.
i have considered and approve of a suspended
sentence for this offender for the following reasons:
i.
a non-custodial sentence can include sufficient
deterrence and denunciation commensurate with the offence and the moral
blameworthiness of this offender;
ii.
the level of sexual assault is toward the low
end;
iii.
there is no prior record or criminal charges; he
is a first-offender;
iv.
the offender has demonstrated through his
compliance with conditions prior to trial that he can abide by community
supervision;
v.
the offender has shown significant remorse and
insight into the offence and the harm it has caused as demonstrated through his
guilty plea, apology, his completion of counselling, his charitable donation, and
his expressed embarrassment, and desire to change;
vi.
the offender is deemed to be a low risk to
re-offend; he has voluntarily removed himself from similar positions of trust
in the community;
vii.
the offender is gainfully employed; and
viii.
the offender has a supportive wife (who has been
present today and on prior occasions) and community.
the
sentence to be imposed
in my view, the only appropriate sentence for
this offender in these circumstances is a suspended sentence and extended
probation, along with ancillary orders.
jail is not an inappropriate sentence for this
level of sexual assault, however, given the extraordinary efforts to begin his
rehabilitation, his remorse, and the offender’s insight, i am satisfied that
imprisonment is not required to protect the public, express the court’s
condemnation for this significant breach of trust, and to deter others from
similar conduct. i am equally satisfied that specific deterrence is unnecessary
given the offender’s career change (he is now a dump-truck driver and does not
intend to work in the passenger delivery service), his remorse, his insight, his
demonstrated compliance while on an extended release until trial, and his expressed
apology.
i am suspending the passing of sentence and
placing the offender on probation for 18 months with the following terms:
i.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour;
ii.
attend court when required;
iii.
notify any changes of name, address, and
occupation;
iv.
report to a probation officer by 5:00 pm on 22
august 2025 in person and thereafter as required, but not less than once per
month for the first six months;
v.
do not have any contact, directly or indirectly,
with [a.h.];
vi.
do not attend at or within 50m of any place of
residence, occupation, education, worship, recreation, or any place you know or
find [a.h.] to be;
vii.
do not possess any weapons;
viii.
complete 100 hours of community service within
the first 12 months of the probation order;
ix.
take counselling as directed by your probation
officer;
x.
complete releases of information in favour of
your probation officer to monitor your attendance, participation, and
completion of counselling and community service; and
xi.
refrain from participating in any capacity as a
driver of passengers of persons unknown to you.
the offender will have until 21 september 2025
to make an appointment with peel regional police to submit to a sampling of his
deoxyribonucleic acid (“dna”) to be analyzed and to have the results uploaded
into the national dna databank. the offender’s dna is to be taken by a
qualified person in circumstances that are hygienic, that respect the
offender’s bodily integrity and privacy, and that respect his health and
safety. force may be used to extract the offender’s dna if he does not submit
to the dna sampling voluntarily.
i have decided not to impose a reporting
requirement under the
sexual offender information registration act
. key
to this determination was the offender’s guilty plea, the up-front
rehabilitative work, the level of sexual assault, and the low risk of
re-offence.
lastly, the offender is prohibited from
possessing the items referred to in s. 110 for 10 years.
for his sake and the sake of our community, i
wish barinder singh well in his rehabilitation.
released:  21 august 2025
justice
g. paul renwick
r.
v.
hamilton
and mason
,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3252 (c.a.)
at para.
102
.
hamilton
, supra
, at paras.
90-91
.
r.
v
. priest
,
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.) at para.
26
, as quoted in
hamilton
,
supra
, at para.
92
.
see subsection 718.2(b) of the
criminal code
.
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no. 6, at para.
17
.
r.
v.
gladue
,
1999 canlii 679 (scc)
, s.c.j. no. 19 at paras.
43 and
48
.
see subs. 718.2(a)(iii.1) of the
criminal code
.