ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. miller
, 2025 oncj 618
date:  2025.11.25
court file no.:  toronto #24-48114328
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
tyrial miller
reasons for
sentence
before justice
p.f. band
heard august 11-14
and october 20, 2025
mr.
m.
boissoneault............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
ms. a. shakeel...................................................................................... counsel
for mr. miller
band j.:
i. introduction
after
trial, i found mr. miller guilty of the following
criminal code
offences
in relation to a violent domestic incident that took place in may 2024:
1.
assault
(s. 266).
2.
assault
with choking (s. 267(c)).
3.
pointing
a firearm (s. 87(1)).
4.
unauthorized
possession of a prohibited firearm (s. 91(1)).
5.
unauthorized
possession of a restricted firearm (handgun) (s. 92(1)).
6.
unauthorized
possession of a loaded restricted firearm (handgun) (s. 95(2)).
7.
careless
handling of ammunition (s. 86(1)).
8.
unauthorized
possession of a prohibited magazine (s. 91(2)).
9.
possession
of a restricted firearm contrary to prohibition (s. 117.01(1)).
10.
possession of a
handgun for the purpose of committing an offence (s. 88(1)).
11.
fail to comply
with release (no weapons condition) (s. 145(5)(a)).
12.
fail to comply
with youth sentence (no weapons condition) (s. 733.1(1)).
13.
fail to comply
with youth sentence (no weapons condition) (s. 733.1(1)).
the
crown proceeded by indictment.
at
the sentencing hearing, the parties took dramatically different positions. on
behalf of the crown, mr. boissoneault sought a sentence of seven years’
imprisonment together with ancillary orders. on mr. miller’s behalf, ms.
shakeel submitted that a conditional sentence of imprisonment in the community (cso)
is appropriate, having regard to mr. miller’s personal circumstances, including
the impacts of anti-black racism, the time he has served in pre-trial detention
and under restrictive conditions of release, and other factors.
the
following reasons explain how i have come to what i consider to be a fit and
proportionate sentence for mr. miller.
ii. the facts
i
set out the facts in my
reasons for judgment
dated september 9, 2025,
which should be read together with these reasons. that said, they can be
summarized as follows. mr. miller and the victim, ms. lindo, are in their early
twenties. they had been in an intimate relationship for approximately 10 months.
at the time of the incident, they had a one-and-a-half-month-old son and were
living with mr. miller’s mother and siblings. the incident started when mr.
miller became angry and jealous because he found a text message from ms. lindo
to another man on one of her phones. in the course of the argument, mr. miller
struck ms. lindo in the face and called her a whore while he was holding the
baby. she slapped him back. he handed the baby over to his sister and struck
ms. lindo again several times. he then pushed her onto his bed and strangled
her with both hands. while this did not last long and she did not lose
consciousness, her vision “went a little dark” and “starry.” he then reached to
his dresser, grabbed a loaded handgun, and pointed it at her head. he said,
“why would you do that to me?” and told her that she was not to be with anyone
else. the incident ended only when mr. miller’s brother chris came in and
pulled him off of ms. lindo. ms. lindo called 911 in a heightened emotional
state. mr. miller remained on scene.
police
arrived at 11 p.m. to find ms. lindo in an emotional state. they also found a semi-automatic
handgun loaded with 17 rounds in a laundry hamper on the balcony.
police
arrested mr. miller in the hallway without incident. at the time, he was on a
bail that required him to live at his aunt’s apartment, in the same building,
and to abide by a 10 p.m. curfew. he was also bound by several court orders
with conditions not to possess weapons, and a s. 109 order prohibiting him from
possessing firearms. while mr. miller does not have an adult record, he has serious
youth court entries that remain within the access period.
at
trial, mr. miller denied having committed the offences, and characterized ms.
lindo as the only aggressor. he also denied any knowledge of the handgun that the
police found on the balcony.
after
trial, i rejected mr. miller’s testimony as untruthful and cited concerns about
his credibility.
iii. application
of the
kienapple
principle
mr.
boissoneault invited me to enter conditional stays on counts 4, 5, 10 and 13.
ms. shakeel submitted that count 8, regarding the magazine (s. 91(2)), should
be stayed because it is subsumed by count 6, regarding the loaded restricted
firearm (s. 95). this is because the crown has not proved beyond a reasonable
doubt that the firearm contained an over-capacity magazine and, therefore, the
count is redundant based on the reasoning of madam justice roberts in
r v
fogah-pierre
2024 onsc 386
at paras.
10 and 11
.
i
agree with ms. shakeel that the nature of the magazine in this case cannot be
resolved by simple reference to the relevant regulations and that mr. miller is
entitled to the benefit of the doubt, albeit after the fact. i also agree with justice
roberts’s reasoning. however, in the circumstances of this case, an acquittal rather
than a stay is called for.
since
the sentencing hearing, i have come to the view that count 12 must be marked as
dismissed. that count charges a violation of s. 137 of the
ycja
and, as
such, could not have been prosecuted with the
criminal code
offences.
as
a result, conditional stays will be entered on counts 4, 5, 10 and 13, an
acquittal will be entered on count 8 and count 12 will be marked as dismissed.
iv. the parties’
sentencing positions
mr.
boissoneault submitted that the appropriate range for mr. miller’s offences,
seen globally, is in the range of seven to nine years. owing to the mitigating
factors, he sought a sentence of seven years, less time served in pre-trial
custody (amounting to 442 days). he cited the need for an exemplary sentence in
violent cases like this, which involve the use of a firearm and choking in the
context of intimate partner violence. he noted that parliament has seen fit to increase
maximum sentences relating to firearms and domestic violence, and to add to the
list of statutorily relevant factors in recent years. as for the correct
approach regarding each count, he argued that in this case, it is sensible to
treat the offences as concurrent, since they are intertwined and mutually
aggravating. he adamantly opposed the imposition of a cso in this case as constituting
an affront to the governing objectives and principles of sentencing.
ms.
shakeel sought a cso of
two-years-less-a-day
. at
first, she arrived at this essentially by deducting
summers
credit (442
days x 1.5 = 663). when i pointed out that such an approach is impermissible
pursuant to
r v fice
2005 scc 32
, ms. shakeel took a different tack. a
sentence of two-years-less-a-day could be reached by punishing the substantive
counts consecutively for a total of four years. if the assault and choking
offences were to receive “time served” – approximately 2 years, rounded up to
account for harsh conditions of pre-sentence custody and restrictive bail
conditions – then the two remaining years would open the door to a cso for the
s. 95 firearm offence. she then relied on mr. miller’s personal circumstances
and evidence regarding the impacts of anti-black racism.
the
parties agree that mr. miller deserves credit for time served in pre-trial
detention as well in accordance with
r v
summers
2014 scc 26
and
r v marshall
2021 onca 344
.
v. applicable sentencing
principles
generally
pursuant
to
s. 718
of the
criminal code
, the fundamental principle of sentencing
is “to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions….” just sanctions have one or more of
the objectives listed in
s. 718
:
•
denunciation.
•
general
and specific deterrence.
•
separation
of offenders from society when necessary.
•
rehabilitation.
•
reparations.
•
promoting
a sense of responsibility.
as
the court of appeal has
repeated in
r v morris
2021 onca 680
at para.
56
, these objectives do not necessarily point to the same sentencing outcome.
sentences must be individualized. arriving at the fit and proportional sentence
for a given individual “is a delicate task”: at para. 66. to do so, sentencing
judges must prioritize and blend the different objectives of sentencing in
order to properly reflect the gravity of the offence and the moral
blameworthiness of the offender. ultimately, judges must use proportionality as
their lodestar:
see
r
v lacasse
,
2015 scc 64 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 64
.
three
additional sentencing principles, parity, restraint and totality are also important.
parity requires that “material differences between the circumstances of the
offence or offender” be “reflected in the sentences
imposed”:
morris
at
para.
108
. restraint, which is remedial in nature, requires the imposition of
the least restrictive or severe punishment that is consistent with the
principle of proportionality:
morris
at paras.
111-112
. it has
particular force in cases involving youthful and first offenders:
see
r v
habib
2024 onca 830
at paras.
31-35
. totality helps to ensure that the total
sentence for multiple offences is proportional and that competing objectives
are given their due weight: see
r v m.v.
2023 onca 724
at para.
100
and
r v johnson
2012 onca 339
at para.
18
.
it
is important to remember that sentencing ranges, which are often cited in cases
like this, are not straitjackets:
lacasse
,
supra
at para.
57
.
a judge must arrive
at the appropriate balance between the seriousness of the offence and the moral
blameworthiness of the offender by considering their circumstances, the
aggravating and mitigating factors, any collateral impacts, applicable
sentencing ranges and the purpose, principles and objectives of sentencing.
possession of illegal
firearms
in
r.
v. nur
2013 onca 677
(aff’d
2015 scc 15
),
the court of appeal held that those who possess
loaded firearms and who are engaged in criminal conduct or conduct that poses a
danger to others should receive exemplary sentences that emphasize deterrence
and denunciation.
in
that case, the court found that a 19-year-old first offender who ran from
police and threw a loaded handgun under a car “could well have received a
sentence of three years”: at para. 206.
in
r. v. mohiadin
2021 onca
122
, the court imposed a three-year sentence on a youthful first offender in
possession of a loaded handgun in his car. both cases are illustrations of
offenders on the “truly criminal conduct” side of the spectrum of s. 95
offences. as justice doherty explained in
nur
, on that end “stands the
outlaw who carries a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm in public places
as a tool of his or her criminal trade. by any reasonable measure, this person
is engaged in truly criminal conduct and poses a real and immediate danger to
the public”: at para. 51. the supreme court of canada’s decision in
nur
did not displace those conclusions.
an
overview of the case law submitted by the parties suggests that a sentencing
range of three to five years is appropriate for an offender who possesses a
loaded prohibited firearm in conjunction with other crimes, or as a “tool of
the trade.” cases involving first offenders guilty of possessing an illegal
handgun with no additional criminality can
attract sentences ranging
from upper reformatory to low penitentiary time:
morris
at paras.
125
and 131
. in some cases, conditional sentences have been imposed on such
offenders
.
pointing a firearm
the
crown
relied on
r v schneider
2017 oncj 444
,
r v reesor
2018 oncj
823
, aff’d
2019
onca 901
,
r v salvati and sacco
2022 onsc
3610
and
r v mcintosh
2016 onca 370
. a range of five to nine years can
be said to emerge from these cases for the offence of pointing a firearm at
someone.
choking in the context of intimate partner
violence
the crown was unable to find cases establishing a
range for the relatively new stand-alone offence of choking during the
commission of an assault (s. 267(c)). however, choking someone is an inherently
dangerous act that can lead to death. whether or not it leads to
unconsciousness or other consequences, it “
is an act
of cruel domination met by sheer horror and often accompanied by serious
physical and psychological harm”:
see
r v lemmon
2012 abca 103
. courts
must treat this offence very seriously, particularly when it arises in the
context of an intimate relationship.
relevance of disadvantage
and anti-black racism
in
r v hassan
2024 onca 782
at para.
11
, the ontario court of appeal
recently reminded us that “the
morris
decision
recognizes that
disadvantaged circumstances can mitigate, to some degree, the moral
blameworthiness of the offender”: at paras. 94 and 99. “a person with a
disadvantaged background may receive a lower sentence than someone from a
stable background where the offence is linked in some way to the background or
systemic factors”: at para. 94.
in
morris
, at para.
1
, the court of appeal wrote that sentencing judges can
take judicial notice of the existence of anti-black racism in canada, and the
gta in particular. it is reflected in many institutions and “most notably the
criminal justice system.” moreover, an offender’s personal circumstances,
including those tied to overt and institutional racism … can be relevant in
determining an appropriate sentence: at para. 4. they can do so in two ways.
first, when an offender’s choices were limited or influenced by their
disadvantaged circumstances, including the impacts of anti-black racism, this
factor can tell of their moral responsibility by helping to explain why and how
the offender came to be where they are today. a connection, but not a causal
one, is required for such factors to have a mitigating impact on sentence: at
paras. 76, 87 and 97. second, such factors can help judges more accurately assess,
weigh and blend competing sentencing objectives: at para. 102.
that
said, the mitigating effect of such factors is limited; “the fundamental
principle of proportionality must prevail in every case”: at paras.101 and 112.
collateral consequences
collateral
consequences, such as an impact on an offender’s immigration status in canada, are
relevant considerations on sentence, but cannot lead to a sentence that is
disproportionate or that is otherwise used to circumvent parliament’s will:
r
v pham
2013 scc 15
at paras.
14 and 15
.
likewise,
the impact of an offender’s sentence on their loved ones and children is a
relevant factor; however, it must not be allowed to overwhelm the analysis:
see
habib
at paras
43-44
.
an
offender’s health status can also be a relevant consideration where a jail or
prison may not be able to see to their care or where incarceration would be
harsher for them by virtue of their condition.
availability of
csos
a
conditional sentence is available when (1) the appropriate sentence is less
than two years’ imprisonment; (2) it would not endanger the safety of the
community; (3) the offence in question is not punishable by a minimum term of
imprisonment; (4) the offence is not among those for which a conditional
sentence is unavailable and (5) it “
would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing”
:
see
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code
.
vi.
aggravating factors
there
are many serious aggravating factors in this case:
•
the
firearm was a loaded semi-automatic pistol.
•
the
pistol was loaded with 17 rounds.
•
the
incident took place in the context of an intimate partner relationship.
•
ms.
lindo, a young black woman who had given birth six weeks prior, was a particularly
vulnerable victim.
•
the
assault was prompted by jealousy.
•
mr.
miller began the assault while holding the couple’s infant son.
•
mr.
miller choked ms. lindo to the point where she saw stars.
•
mr.
miller pointed the loaded pistol at ms. lindo at point blank range. this was
extraordinarily dangerous.
•
as
is evident from the 911 call, the offence terrorized ms. lindo.
•
there
were others nearby, in a cramped apartment.
•
the
handgun was left in a hamper on the balcony of an apartment in which several
people lived, including a teenager; moreover, children were known to visit.
•
mr.
miller was subject to court orders prohibiting him from possessing weapons and
firearms.
•
mr.
miller was on bail with electronic monitoring and had been violating the curfew
and residence conditions of that bail.
•
mr.
miller’s prior youth court entries include a robbery in 2020, assaults, possession
of a weapon and breaches in 2021 and assaulting with a knife, choking and
threatening a prior girlfriend in 2022. in that case, the victim was choked to
the point of unconsciousness and suffered injuries, including a cut to her
finger.
that
said, i am prepared to give this factor less weight than i would an adult
record, given the passage of time and mr. miller’s age when he committed those
offences:
see
r v kumi
2025 onca 3
.
vii. mitigating factors and
collateral consequences
mitigating
factors
in
his affidavit, mr. miller explained that he obtained a firearm to protect
himself, ms. lindo and their son. while i will say more about this below, this
is not a mitigating factor in and of itself. in
r v j.g
.,
o.j.
no. 4599
at para. 35 (s.c.j.)
, justice nordheimer wrote that “[t]he belief that
a gun is an effective and legitimate means of self-protection is one that must
be rejected, clearly and absolutely”:
see also
r. v. johnson
2022 onsc
2688
at para.
41
.
that
said, there are compelling attenuating factors in this matter. some can be
expressed simply. others require more discussion. i begin with the simple ones.
mr.
miller is a youthful black man, who was 20 years old when he committed these
offences. he has no adult convictions. he has the love and support of his
mother and siblings. he is in a nine-month relationship with a young woman to
whom he is now engaged. his family and fiancée say that he is committed to
being a good father to his son and to working on improving himself. he has done
some programming while in custody and has been accepted to attend a general
studies programme at humber college for 2026. he held some jobs when he was 16
and 17, and now has an offer to work in a tire shop upon his release. he has
been working with the youth association for academics, athletics, and character
education (yaaace) since october 2023. yaaace provides comprehensive support to
individuals like mr. miller as they transition back into the community. his
worker believes that with yaaace’s continued support, mr. miller “
has the
resilience and determination to successfully reintegrate and thrive as a
productive and valued member of society.”
when
he spoke directly to the court, mr. miller said that while he regrets being in
jail, it has given him the opportunity to reflect on the person he wants to be:
a good father and role model to his son. he has career goals and understands
that he is lucky to have the support of his family.
mr.
miller has been subjected to lockdowns and triple bunking while in custody. he
pointed to increased violence, limited access to the telephone and showers, and
little opportunity for exercise such as playing basketball and doing pull-ups.
ms. shakeel suggests that he deserves an additional 90 days’ credit for those
harsh conditions. he suffers from scoliosis, for which he says he needs physiotherapy.
he has also been diagnosed with ptsd.
mr.
miller spent 135 days under strict bail conditions. that said, he has been
charged with breaching those same conditions, along with other offences. these
remain before the court.
mr.
miller’s personal circumstances require a more involved discussion. mr. miller
was born in st. vincent. he is the seventh of eight children. he met his father
a few times when he was little. he pined for a connection with him. his mother became
involved with a different man, who was abusive. mr. miller first witnessed him
assaulting his mother when he was five years old. his mother moved to canada to
get away from the abuse. mr. miller’s stepfather and other relatives were
abusive toward mr. miller and his siblings on a daily basis, sometimes using
weapons. his mother sent for him a few months later, in 2011, having heard
about the abuse he was suffering. one of his brothers and his sister moved here
five years ago. another brother arrived three years ago. other siblings remain
in st. vincent and st. lucia.
here,
mr. miller’s mother was able to make sure that he was fed and clothed, but they
lived in a predominantly black, low-income neighbourhood. mr. miller’s
affidavit explains that he was exposed to violence at a young age. he has seen
someone fall from a building. he has witnessed three shootings, including at
the age of twelve, when his best friend was shot and killed. at 14, mr. miller
was shot at and assaulted. he was stabbed in 2021 or 2022; this led to him
developing scoliosis. at school, he acted up and caused fights. he attended
three different high schools. despite being offered support in school, he dropped
out after grade 10 because he found it too difficult.
mr.
miller’s affidavit explains that his experience with police has been negative. police
have stopped and questioned him regularly, when alone or with a group of other black
males. the first time was when he was 11 or 12 years old. he was pushed against
a fence and patted down. because of this, he has developed a distrust of police.
he feels that they think he is a criminal and he feels harassed.
as
for the firearm, mr. miller’s affidavit explains that he received threats
against ms. lindo and his son and felt the need to protect himself and his
family. he knows this was the wrong decision, “but it felt right at the time.”
i
can readily appreciate how the physical violence that mr. miller witnessed and
experienced starting at the age of five at the hands of his caregivers and then
on the streets, and the lack of a positive male role model have had a role in
shaping who he is today. i am also of the view that the predominantly black,
low-income and heavily policed environment in which he grew up in toronto
subjected him to systemic if not overt anti-black racism. together, these
factors help me understand why he chose to obtain a firearm to defend himself
and his family. however, if there is any connection between his personal
disadvantage and the social context in which he grew up, on the one hand, and
his decision to choke and point a firearm at ms. lindo, on the other, it is
very weak.
collateral consequences
despite
living here since 2011, mr. miller is a permanent resident. the findings of
guilt in this case have made him inadmissible in canada. a carceral sentence
above six months will cause him to lose his right of appeal against any
deportation order.
mr.
miller’s family, particularly his young son, are also to be considered. while i
am sympathetic to his fiancée, that relationship is so new as to warrant very
limited consideration. much of it has taken place while mr. miller has been in
custody.
on
this record, i was not persuaded that mr. miller’s scoliosis and ptsd were the
types of health conditions that should lead to a reduction in sentence. he is
able to play basketball and use a pull-up bar. i have not been provided with
enough reliable information about the impact of his ptsd or any particular
needs that he has in relation to it.
viii. seriousness of the offences
the
offences mr. miller committed were extremely serious. he decided to arm himself
with a restricted handgun whose only purpose is to maim or kill people. he assaulted
ms. lindo in the presence of their infant son and other members of his family.
he then choked her, threatened her and pointed a loaded gun at her. he had to
be pulled off her by his brother. all this while violating core terms of his
bail and being subject to several court orders regarding weapons. leaving the
gun where he did exposed others, including children, to real danger. the impact
on ms. lindo had to be significant. also, the impact of the violence may very
well reverberate through is son as he grows up.
ix. moral culpability
mr.
miller’s age attenuates his moral responsibility:
see
habib
at paras.
31-35
. the conditions of mr. miller’s childhood and exposure to violence are
very concerning. combined with the effects of anti-black racism, they also tend
to mitigate his moral culpability for possessing the firearm to a degree. if
they reduce his moral culpability for choking ms. lindo, however, that effect
is very low. much lower still with respect to pointing the loaded handgun at
her.
mr.
miller’s level of moral culpability is significant.
ix. applicable sentencing principles and objectives
mr.
miller has a history of committing violence and using weapons. the offences he
committed on his then girlfriend in 2022 are eerily similar to what he did to
mr. lindo except that in this case, he upped the ante by using a loaded gun. he
was also on a restrictive bail and breaching several court orders.
mr.
miller continues to present a danger to the public, particularly women he might
become involved with. general deterrence, specific deterrence, denunciation and
protection of the public are the core sentencing objectives in this matter. given
his age, the support of his family and his realistic plans, rehabilitation also
remains an important goal. that said, while mr. miller regrets his current
situation, he has not taken responsibility for what he did, with the possible
exception of possessing the firearm.
giving him the benefit of the doubt that he has accepted responsibility for
possessing the firearm, i see mr. miller’s rehabilitative prospects as fair. it
is not too late for him to make real changes.
xii. applicable sentence
i
have carefully considered the circumstances of mr. miller’s offences in the
context of his background, the objectives of sentencing, the aggravating and
mitigating factors and the relevant collateral consequences. in doing so, i
have reviewed the cases cited by the parties. of course, no case is ever
entirely on all fours with the facts before a sentencing court. that said, i
note that the cases that ms. shakeel filed in support of her argument for a cso
are distinguishable in important respects.
most importantly,
none of them involved
pointing
a firearm or intimate partner violence.
possession of a loaded firearm
to
identify the appropriate range of sentence, it is important to
plot mr. miller’s
possession of a firearm on the spectrum described by justice doherty in
nur
,
cited above
.
firearms offences are more serious when the offender possesses one as a tool of
the trade or in conjunction with other offences. we often see this in the
context of drug dealers. however, to draw a distinction between an offender who
uses
their firearm against someone else in a case like this and an
offender who possesses a firearm and happens to be a drug dealer seems
artificial. both are engaged in true criminality and both are a real danger to
the public.
i
find that mr. miller’s possession of a loaded handgun places him squarely in
the true crime side of the spectrum. the reasons for this are that he chose to
use a restricted handgun carrying 17 rounds of ammunition in carrying out a
domestic assault that was sparked by jealousy and a need to exercise control. he
did this while prohibited by several court orders.
in
this case, the applicable range for the possession of the firearm is three to
five years.
pointing the firearm
as
i stated above, a range of five to nine years is appropriate for the offence of
pointing a firearm. in this case, the aggravating factors are that it was
loaded and wielded in the context of intimate partner violence.
assault and choking
assault
in the domestic context is a serious offence. in this case, given the
aggravating factors, a sentence of up to six months in jail could be warranted.
choking
someone is a very serious form of assault, particularly when the victim is
one’s intimate partner. this kind of assault can attract a variety of punishments,
including jail or prison. in this case, given the aggravating factors, the
appropriate sentence could be up to 12 months in jail.
breaches of no
weapons conditions and s. 109/110 prohibitions
the
courts treat breaches of s. 109 and 110 firearms prohibitions very seriously.
consecutive sentences of 6-12 months are not uncommon:
see
r v georgievski
2024 onsc 5899
at para.
22
. for reasons that are not entirely clear, the courts
do not uniformly treat breaches of no weapons conditions found in bail and
probation orders in the same way. section 109 and 110 orders often follow
convictions for firearms offences – but not necessarily. they are all court
orders that are meant to be obeyed in the interest of public safety. at the
very least, possession of a firearm in breach of a no weapons condition must be
treated as among the most serious type of such a breach. in this case, each
breach could warrant a sentence of 6 to 12 months.
i
have chosen to identify the fit sentences that i would impose for each offence,
and to adjust them in accordance with the principle of totality as this is the preferred
method according to the supreme court of canada: see
r v bertrand marchand
2023 scc 26
at para.
43
.
i
find that the fit and proportionate sentences in this case, viewed
individually, are as follows:
•
for
the assault (count 1): three months.
•
for
the choking (count 2): one year.
•
for
the point firearm offence (count 3): five years.
•
for
the possession of a loaded restricted firearm (count 6): three years.
•
for
the careless storage of ammunition (count 7): three months.
•
for
the breaches (counts 9 and 11): six months each, to be served concurrently to
one another.
i
would have the sentences for the possession of the firearm and the careless handling
of ammunition run concurrently with the point firearm sentence. i would have
the sentence for the assault and the choking run concurrently with one another
but consecutively to the point firearm sentence. i would have the sentences for
the breaches run concurrently to one another and but consecutively to the other
sentences.
as
such, a conditional sentence is not available to mr. miller. even if it was,
technically, it would be grossly disproportionate and inconsistent with the
fundamental principles of sentencing.
that
said, if i were to sentence mr. miller as i have described, the total sentence
would be six years and nine months, or 81 months. a sentence of that length
would be disproportionate in mr. miller’s case.
i
would reduce that sentence to a total of five years to account for the
principle of totality. mr. miller is a youthful black offender who had a
traumatic childhood in which he was abused and exposed to violence, directly
and indirectly, from a very young age. this included gun violence. he also
experienced the impacts of anti-black racism in his neighbourhood, which have
led to a distrust of the police.
in
morris
, the court of appeal reminded
us that when courts acknowledge these factors, they can attempt to restore
confidence in the administration of justice by distancing the sentencing
process from society’s complicity in anti-black racism.
as
a result, mr. miller will be sentenced to five years in prison in relation to
the point firearm offence, and will serve all the other sentences i have listed
concurrently.
he
will be given credit for the equivalent of 663 days of pre-trial custody and an
additional 90 days to reflect the harsh conditions of his time in custody. i
state this last factor explicitly and numerically, as other judges have, to
call attention to the human cost of the continually deplorable conditions in ontario’s
detention centres:
see
georgievski
, cited above at paras.
31-35
.
xiii. conclusion
this
will leave mr. miller with a net sentence of 1,072 days, or approximately three
years, to be served.
in
addition, mr. miller will provide a sample of his dna and be prohibited from
possessing firearms and other weapons listed in
s. 109
of the
criminal code
for life.
lastly,
mr. miller will be subject to a s. 743.21 order prohibiting him from
communicating with ms. lindo, with appropriate exceptions relating to their son.
released:
november 25, 2025
justice
patrice f. band
this came up when i raised the apparent inconsistency
between his testimony at trial, in which he denied any connection with the
firearm, and his affidavit, in which he explained why he possessed a firearm.
in response, ms. shakeel submitted that he did not admit that the firearm was
the one that i found him guilty of pointing at ms. lindo. it is very difficult
to know what to make of that. after trial, i found that mr. miller was not
credible. if i reject ms. shakeel’s submission and interpret his affidavit in a
way that accords with common sense, he has shown a willingness to perjure
himself.
r v stewart
2022 onsc 6997
,
r v lewis
2022 onsc 1260
,
r v sahadevan
2023 onsc 6764
and
r v
vijayakumaran
2025
onsc 886
.