ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. cobb
, 2025 oncj 140
date:  2025 03 11
court file no.:  windsor
23-81105156
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
brian
cobb
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 27
february, 3 march 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 11 march 2025
jonathan lall......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
brian cobb...............................................................................................
on his own behalf
pratt j.:
the
defendant brian cobb is charged with two offences: count 1 alleges he breached
a release order by going to a prohibited place, and count 2 alleges he uttered
a threat to cause bodily harm.  the crown relies on direct and circumstantial
evidence to argue it has proved both counts beyond a reasonable doubt.  the defendant,
representing himself, argues the wording of the condition he allegedly breached
is unworkably vague, and that there is insufficient evidence it was he who sent
the threatening email.  in the result, he submits he should be acquitted of
both counts.
these
reasons explain why i reach different conclusions on each count.
admissions
as
the defendant was self-represented, there were few admissions.  on consent, the
crown filed a certified copy of the information and release order that relate
to count 1.  it was also agreed between the parties that the crown would file
an audio recording of a meeting that had been made by the defendant.  while it
was, strictly speaking, evidence brought by the defendant, the crown agreed to
make it part of its case to assist the defendant.  a transcript of the
recording was also provided, which the crown conceded was generally accurate.
issues
i
see two issues in this case, one related to each count.
1.
did
the defendant attend a place “frequented” by
maisam
al-rais?
2.
has
the crown proved beyond a reasonable doubt it was the defendant who sent the
threatening email?
issue 1: did the
defendant attend a place “frequented” by maisam al-rais?
on
22 august 2023 the defendant was placed on a release order with conditions.
the order was in effect at the time these charges arose.  the first count of
the information alleges the defendant:
…did, being at
large on a release order, fail to comply with a condition of that release order
to wit: do not be within 200m of any place where you know maisam al-rais to
live, work, go to school, frequent or any place you know the person(s) to be
except for required court appearances except pursuant to a family court order
made after today’s date…
(emphasis in original)
it
was not argued that either exception applied to the incident in question.
the
crown argues that the breach is founded on the defendant’s attendance at ste.
anne’s church in tecumseh, ontario.  this location, he says, is one the
defendant knew the complainant ms. al-rais frequented.  a review of the
evidence and the circumstances of the defendant’s relationship with the
complainant is necessary.
the
defendant and complainant were married in 2009.  they share three children,
ages 13, 12, and 8.  according to the complainant, the couple separated on 7
december 2021.  since then, they have been engaged in divorce proceedings.
the
complainant was asked about her church attendance.  she testified that in 2021
she was a member of the ste. anne’s parish.  she and her children would attend
mass every sunday.  the defendant would go with them when he was not working.
after
the couple separated, her attendance increased.  she said that in 2022 and
2023, in addition to going every sunday, she would also go two or three times
during the week.  in cross-examination, she specified these midweek attendances
were in the evenings.  she also confirmed that she never told the defendant of
her increased attendance.  as far as she knew, he knew her to go only on
sundays.
on
tuesday 31 october 2023, while governed by the release order, the defendant
visited the church.  according to katherine marsh, one of the employees, he arrived
over the lunch hour.  he entered the main church building playing loud music on
his phone and yelling that he wanted to speak to someone.  ms. marsh came out
of her upstairs office and went to the main floor.  by the time she got to the
defendant, he was in the sanctuary of the church, near the altar.  he was
adamant that he wanted to speak to father patrick beneteau.  he told ms. marsh
that he was investigating a child sex trafficking ring that he said was
operating out of the church.  she told him father beneteau was not available
and he insisted on seeing a priest.  she described the defendant as intimidating
and aggressive, and said he was using profanity in his communication with her.
as
father beneteau had been re-assigned out of ste. anne’s, ms. marsh offered to
get the current pastor, father chris gillespie.  the defendant agreed and said
he wasn’t leaving until he spoke to someone.  she texted father gillespie,
hoping he was around.
they
then left the main church and went to another building on the property.  this
building housed the rectory and offices.  there, they met with both father gillespie
and another priest, father keith morrison.  together, they entered father
gillespie’s office for a meeting.
in
that meeting, the defendant told the others about an investigation he’d
commenced.  he told them he was a member of law enforcement, specifically with
border services.  he was concerned his wife was being prostituted as part of a
larger sex trafficking ring.  he provided father gillespie with extensive
information he said he’d obtained through research.
the
substance of that meeting was provided to the court in the form of the audio
recording made by the defendant at the time.  it largely corroborates ms.
marsh’s evidence.  at the end of the meeting, the defendant asked for father gillespie’s
email.  he declined to provide it, but the defendant was given the general ste.
anne’s email.  the defendant told the others to expect an email, which he
called a “notice”.
i
observe that at no time during his attendance on 31 october did the defendant ask
to see the complainant or ever suggest that he expected her to be there.
the
crown argues that since the defendant knew the complainant was a regular
churchgoer, the church was a place he knew her to frequent.  the release order
barred him from being within 200m of any place he knew her to frequent.  by
attending the church, he was violating that order.
in
support of their position, the crown relied on the case of
r.
v.
boise
o.j. no. 516 (c.j.)
, a decision of my brother justice baker.  in that
case, the defendant was prohibited from going within 300m of anywhere he knew
the complainant to frequent.  it was alleged he visited a cottage property
owned by the complainant’s mother.  at the relevant time, the complainant
visited the property regularly to perform maintenance, but was not present when
the defendant attended.  the question before the court, therefore, was whether
the property was a place the complainant frequented, regardless of whether she
was physically present when the defendant went there.
justice
baker reviewed dictionary definitions of “frequent” as there appears to be no
appellate or trial court guidance on the issue.  in the end, the court laid out
seven principles to summarize just what the term means.  in essence, the term
requires repeated attendance, though that attendance need not be often.  there
must be some kind of relationship between the person and the place at the time
of the offence, and the more intimate the connection between the person and the
location, the more likely that frequenting will be made out.
the
court rejected the argument of defence counsel that the condition was meant to
prevent contact between defendant and complainant.  rather, the condition had
as its aim the creation of safe spaces where the complainant would not have to
worry about running into the defendant.
there
is an attractiveness to the position taken in
boise
.  certainly,
parliament has consistently emphasized the need to protect victims of crime and
ensure their safety.  the wide net cast by this definition of “frequent” could
be seen to achieve those objectives.
with
the utmost of respect to my learned colleague, i cannot accept the definition
of frequent as laid out.  in my view, the net is simply too wide.  as defined,
it would create vast, amorphous no-go zones that a defendant would be in
constant danger of breaching.  this is all the more concerning when a radius is
added to a frequent condition.  in the present case, the defendant was barred
from attending within 200m of anywhere he knew the complainant to frequent.
accepting for the moment that would include ste. anne’s parish, it would also
include a portion of tecumseh road east and lesperance road.  that is, the
defendant would not be permitted to use either of those streets within 200m of
the church.  he could not drive past the church, using two major thoroughfares
in the town.
given
the open-ended nature of the term, the
boise
definition would also mean
the defendant could not go within 200m of the grocery store he knows the
complainant has attended in the past.  it would bar his attendance at or near
any shopping centres or offices he knows she has been to more than once.  it would
be extremely difficult for the defendant to live in the same town as the
complainant under such a condition.
the
boise
definition specifically rejects any knowledge element on the part
of the defendant.  attendance at a time when he might not expect the
complainant to be there, or even at a time when he would know conclusively that
she isn’t there, would still be prohibited.  for example, if the defendant knew
the complainant was out of town, he still could not attend any place she went
to repeatedly.  the church, grocery store, shopping mall, and other places
would still be off limits.  in my view, this does not protect the complainant;
it is a punitive restriction on his liberty with no reasonable basis.  that restriction
is an even greater unjustified incursion on his freedom when the radius element
is added in.  it is not inconceivable that a person could be charged with breaching
such a condition for being anywhere near a complainant’s typical route to work.
if the complainant habitually drove past the intersection of tecumseh and
ouellette avenue, for example, that would meet the
boise
definition of a
location she frequents.  the defendant would be barred from attending within
200m of that intersection, or any other location she passed each day.  this is
not to say police would likely charge someone for driving past such a location,
but the point is that under the
boise
definition, they could.
to
make the frequent condition reasonable, or even practically workable, there
must be a knowledge component.  i note that the condition in the release order
that follows the frequent condition states, “or any place you know the
person(s) to be”.  this imparts a knowledge requirement.  the other prohibited
locations, i.e. places the defendant knows the complainant to live, work, or go
to school would not need such a requirement as it is reasonable to expect the
complainant would be present at her residence, school, or workplace much of the
time.  the concept of frequenting, on the other hand, is potentially so wide
and undefined that making the breach of it effectively an absolute liability
offence is inappropriate and unjustified.
in
my view, attendance at a location known to be frequented by a complainant
requires some risk that the complainant be present, or at least that they be indirectly
affected by the person’s attendance.  the entire point of a non-attendance
condition is to avoid contact between the parties.  it is not meant to create a
network of bubbles a defendant can never enter regardless of where the
complainant might be at any given time.
the
problem is still more acute when a frequenting condition is added to a release
order.  at that stage of a proceeding, a defendant is still presumed innocent.
an argument might be made that such a condition is appropriate in a probation
order, after a defendant is convicted and the risk they pose to a victim has
been proven.  that is not the case when charges are still outstanding.  a
defendant’s liberty interest must surely be recognized and not unreasonably restricted
when they still bear the presumption of innocence.
in
the present case, the defendant brings up what i see as another valid point:
the property in question in
boise
was a private residence.  in this
case, it is a church.  i see a difference between a private location and a
public one.  attendance at a private residence where a defendant knows the
complainant has gone regularly would almost always carry with it the risk of
contact.  i’m not persuaded attendance at a public building would necessarily
carry the same risk.
on
the evidence i heard, the defendant knew the complainant attended ste. anne’s
each sunday.  while her attendance increased after their separation, the
defendant did not know that.  at most, he may have known her parents sometimes
attended morning mass during the week.  when he went to the church on tuesday
31 october 2023 at mid-day, there was no reasonable risk that he would
encounter the complainant.  his business at the church that day underscores
that he did not go there with any intention of seeking out the complainant.  he
wanted only to speak to a priest.  there is no evidence he intended to see the
complainant that day, or that he was trying to locate her at the church.
a
breach of a frequenting condition requires more than mere presence.  context is
important.  there must be some reasonable risk of contact.  to hold otherwise
makes the condition unworkably broad and punitive.
on
the evidence in this case, i find there was no such risk when the defendant
attended ste. anne’s church that day.  he will be found not guilty of count 1.
issue 2: has the crown proved beyond a reasonable
doubt it was the defendant who sent the threatening email?
count
2 alleges the defendant sent a threat to cause bodily harm to chris gillespie
by email.  the main argument advanced by the defendant was that the crown had
not shown he was the actual sender of the emails in question.  while it did
come from an email address he owned, he argued the crown did not show exclusive
opportunity on his part.  there should be a reasonable doubt that perhaps
someone else with access to the email account was the real sender.
the
email in question was one of several sent from briancobb13@xxx to steanne@xxx.
the time stamps on the emails indicate they were all sent the night of 1
november 2023, at 8:31pm, 9:07pm, 10:05pm, 10:33pm, 11:11pm and finally at
11:46pm.  the portion of the email relied on by the crown as being a threat to
cause bodily harm was in the fifth email sent, at 11:11pm.  it included the
following:
you
fucking touch my children, or any children you can expect your cock shoved down
your fucking throat after i stick a 4” by 4” piece of would [sic] up your ass
and make you stay alive for a week or more!
it
was not disputed that the words used constitute a threat.  a conditional threat
is still a threat (
see:
r.
v.
ross
(1986)
1986 canlii 4625 (on ca)
,
26 c.c.c. (3d) 413 (ont.
c.a.)
).  the threatened course of action would clearly amount to bodily harm.
i find as a fact the statement included in the fifth email constitutes a threat
contrary to s. 264.1(1).
in
his closing argument, the defendant submitted that as he’d been incarcerated
since arrest, he had not had the chance to see if any of his accounts had been
compromised.  he also said in argument that the complainant had access to his
accounts and that perhaps she was involved in sending the emails.
the
defendant did not call evidence in this trial.  when he first said he did not
want to do so, i took the opportunity to ensure he was making an informed
decision.  i advised him firstly that the decision to testify or call evidence
was entirely his.  no one could force him to abandon his right to silence,
which right persisted throughout the trial.  testifying or calling evidence
was, however, his opportunity to get “his side” before the court.  if he
elected not to testify or call other evidence, he could not introduce new
assertions in his argument.  the defendant advised me he understood.  in fact,
it was after this exchange that he had discussions with the crown that resulted
in the crown filing the audio recording as part of its case.  it is clear to me
he understood that if he wanted to get evidence before the court, this was his
opportunity.  aside from giving the recording to the crown to file, he made no
other attempt to provide evidence at the trial.
he
did, however, put other emails to one of the crown witnesses in
cross-examination.  these emails were marked as exhibit a on the trial as the
witness was not able to identify them conclusively.  they do not, therefore,
form part of the evidence i can consider.  on their face, they appeared to be emails
sent from the defendant’s email account, but on dates when he was in custody.
the implication was that, as emails were sent from that account at a time when
he wasn’t able to access it, other people could have had that access at the
time the threatening email was sent.  the difficulty with that position is these
later emails were never authenticated.  i also heard no evidence that the
defendant did not have access to the email account while in custody.  it was
never asked of the complainant whether she had access to his email account.
assertions of a lack of access to email while in custody, or of the complainant
or someone else having some level of control over the defendant’s email, are
not part of the trial evidence.
in
the result, i do not consider the later emails in reaching a verdict on this
count.  i do consider the possibility that someone other than the defendant may
have sent the email in question, but only in the context of the burden being on
the crown to prove the defendant was the sender beyond a reasonable doubt.  the
crown conceded that it is possible for the non-owner of an email address to
have access to it.
to
prove the defendant was the sender, the crown relies on circumstantial evidence.
there is no direct evidence that the defendant sent the email and so the crown
must point to surrounding circumstances to establish this fact.
in
the case of
r.
v.
villaroman
2016 scc 33 (canlii)
,
1 s.c.r. 1000
the supreme
court of canada summarized how circumstantial evidence should be used by a
trier of fact.  at paragraph 30, justice cromwell stated:
it follows that in
a case in which proof of one or more elements of the offence depends
exclusively or largely on circumstantial evidence, it will generally be helpful
to the jury to be cautioned about too readily drawing inferences of guilt. no
particular language is required. telling the jury that an inference of guilt
drawn from circumstantial evidence should be the only reasonable inference that
such evidence permits will often be a succinct and accurate way of helping the
jury to guard against the risk of "filling in the blanks" by too
quickly overlooking reasonable alternative inferences.
guilt
must be the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence.  if other
inferences that point away from guilt are present, either based on the evidence
or on a lack of evidence, the crown will have failed to prove guilt to the
criminal standard.
applied
to the present case, has the crown proved that the defendant’s personal
authorship of the threatening email is the only reasonable inference available
to be drawn?  in my view, the answer to that question is yes.  i will explain
why that is.
i
begin my analysis by recognizing that no one piece of evidence in a trial
should be viewed in a vacuum.  this is especially so when considering
circumstantial evidence.  while the crown relies on one email to substantiate
the charge of uttering a threat, it put into evidence six emails in total.  the
alleged threat is found in the fifth email.  in determining if the
circumstances only reasonably point towards guilt, i must consider all the
emails together with the situation that preceded them.
at
the meeting between the defendant and the church staff on 31 october, the defendant
referred to a fear that his wife, the complainant, was being prostituted by a
sex trafficking ring.  he said he’d found evidence of her participation in
pornography by locating a video he said she was in, but said that in the video,
she’d been wearing a mask.
in
the sixth email sent to the church, the sender included seven photographs.  in
five of the seven, a woman can be seen wearing a black mask.  all photos show
either nudity or explicit pornography.
in
the meeting, he also referenced cheryl hodgkin, whom he identified as the
complainant’s family lawyer.  he told church staff that ms. hodgkin was likely
an israeli intelligence agent who was involved in the ongoing mishandling of
his divorce proceedings, with the complicity of the superior court of justice.
in
the fifth email sent to the church, the sender refers to ms. hodgkin twice,
once regarding a claim that she was abducting children and once referencing her
law firm and accusing her of abducting immigrants.
in
the sixth email, in a passage where individuals’ names are repeated many times,
the name “hodgkin” appears twice and “hogdkin” appears once.
in
the meeting, the defendant refers to a cult called “sanctum” or “6309”.  he
also said the people responsible for the sex ring get paid through “963”.
the
first email mentions a group called either sanctum or 369.  the second email is
a pasted excerpt from the
criminal code
followed by pages and pages of “369”
repeated over and over.  the third email includes an attachment that goes into
significant detail describing the significance of the numbers 3, 6, and 9.
in
the meeting, the defendant made extensive mention of the stock market and the
issuance of shares and statutory instruments.
in
the first and sixth emails, the sender references financial markets and
securities fraud.
at
the end of the meeting, the defendant asked for father gillespie’s email
address.  as i noted above, that request was declined but the defendant was
given the general email for the parish, which was steanne@dol.ca.  at page 27,
starting at line 21 of the transcript of the audio recording, the defendant
says the following:
brian:           so,
so, okay, so i’m gonna be sending you guys notice.  so what, uh, what email
address would you prefer me to use?  i would-, i am, i’m asking out of respect
because the notice i’m gonna send is gonna be like, pretty heavy and it’s
gonna, it’s gonna go to a lot of people.
after
father gillespie told the defendant he wasn’t comfortable giving him his own
email address, the defendant said this at page 27, line 29 and onward:
well, i won’t, i
won’t give you it-, it’s not-, i’m not serving you in particular, you’re just
the one that receives the notice it’s actually i’m serving pope francis, so you’re
gonna have to get it up to the pope.
the
first email received by the church bears the subject line: “urgent notice –
surrender”.  it was directed towards pope francis and king charles iii.
(i
pause to note that, having listened to the audio and read the transcript, i
find the passages cited above, and those noted below, to have been transcribed
correctly.)
the
pastor of ste. anne’s church is, as i’ve said, father christopher gillespie.  the
second email sent repeats the name “father kris” a total of eighteen times in
the subject line.  in argument, the defendant submitted that the spelling of
that name called the meaning of the emails into question as father gillespie
spells his name “chris” and the emails refer to “kris”.  i would only note that
at no point in the meeting, at least as reflected by the recording or any other
evidence, was the defendant ever given father gillespie’s name in writing.  he
would not have known how father gillespie spells his first name.
the
fourth email refers to “kris kringle”.  it includes a series of questions.  among
them were:
you seemed to know
quite a bit about me, for never having met?
you seemed very
concerned about my employment status, like you knew something, do tell?
at
various points in the transcript, father gillespie asked the defendant
questions about his status as a law enforcement officer.
the
sender then writes:
you mentioned
something that was curious to me, about how did i know it was ste anne? and not
another church, which led me to look into the document closer.
at
pages 17 and 18 of the audio transcript, father gillespie questioned the
defendant about how he came to the conclusion that the sex trafficking ring was
operating out of ste. anne’s church.
the
fifth email, the one with the allegedly threatening comment, began with the
following, in multiple font sizes:
kris kris kris did
you fuck the whore of babylon?
ma
si
am
is
ra
al
?
kris kris kris
kris kris kris, do you know who i am?
kris kris kris
kris kris kris kris kris kris
after
stating the name kris many times, the sender went on to make the comments on
which the crown relies.  further, the first line would seem to include a
thinly-veiled reference to the complainant, whose name is maisam al-rais.
considering
the timing of the emails and their content, i find as a fact that all were sent
by the same person.  they were sent in quick succession, and all relate to the
same subject matter.  they were clearly all sent by the same author.
taking
all the evidence into account, the idea that anyone other than the defendant
sent the threatening email is not a reasonable inference.  the defendant told
church staff they would be receiving a “notice” and asked for an email
address.  the next night, the email address the defendant was given received an
email entitled “urgent notice – surrender”.  the subject matter of the emails
was connected to and expanded upon the defendant’s claims made at the meeting.
the fourth email makes specific mention of the meeting.  the other emails
reflect the same or similar topics the defendant spoke of at the meeting.  the
notion that someone other than the defendant would send the emails, at that
point in time and with that content, is an unreasonable inference.
the
crown does not have to negate every possible competing inference.  they need
only show beyond a reasonable doubt that guilt is the only
reasonable
inference available.  in my view, they have done so.
i
therefore find as a fact that the defendant sent all six emails.  in
particular, he sent the fifth email which included the threat.
the
crown has proved the defendant’s guilt on count 2 beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
defendant will be found not guilty of count 1 and guilty of count 2.
released:
11 march 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt