citation
:
r. v. nguyen
, 2025 oncj 685
date:  december 22, 2025
ontario
court of justice
toronto
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and  —
parker nguyen
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
the crown
c. kalantzis
for
the defendant
m.
macchia, c. szpulak and h. kashani
heard:
december 10, 11, 12, 13, 2024: january 24, april 24, september 29, 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction
the defendant, parker nguyen, is charged
with possession of various illicit drugs for the purpose of trafficking and
possession of proceeds of crime arising out of the execution of search warrants
on april 24, 2023, at two residences: unit 70 – 2901 jane street and unit 510 –
2800 keele street in the city of toronto.
the defendant brought a
charter
challenge to the admissibility of the evidence seized during the execution of
the warrants.  that challenge resulted in the exclusion of the evidence
discovered at the keele street residence. the evidence found at the jane street
residence was ruled admissible. the reasons for those rulings are set out
below.
a trial followed during which the crown
called evidence from the police involved in the search of the jane street
residence and the defendant’s arrest at that property. the defence called no
evidence.
the principal issue in the trial was whether
the crown had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had knowledge
and control over the contraband found at the jane street residence.
b.
the
charter application
(a)
introduction
the defendant (applicant) brought a
charter
application to exclude the evidence seized during the execution of the search warrants,
alleging that the affidavit in support of the search warrants (ito), after proper
amplification and with certain portions excised, could not have supported the
issuance of the warrants. the defendant further argued that the police officers
responsible for the drafting of the ito sought to mislead the issuing justice
with the intention of subverting the course of justice and that the warrants
should thus be quashed. he further argued that his s. 8
charter
rights
were breached when the police failed to make a timely report to a justice
pursuant to
s. 489.1
of the
criminal code
. finally, it was argued that
the police breached the defendant’s right to counsel upon his arrest.
the applicant called several police
witnesses on the
charter
application. he himself did not testify.
(b)
the application to cross-examine the affiant
the ito was based on information supplied to
the police by cao hoang, the defendant’s girlfriend, and mother of his child. there
were several inconsistencies and omissions in the ito. it was apparent that
some of what the affiant averred was inaccurate. i held that the relatively low
threshold for a limited cross-examination of the affiant, d.c. mcgill, and the
sub-affiant, d.c. bevalaqua, had been met.
r v pires
,
2005 scc 66
at
para
40
.
(c)
analysis of the s. 8 claim
the ito was sworn to by d.c. matthew mcgill.
it is mostly based on what cao hoang told the police in three meetings with
them. not only did she tell them about the defendant’s drug dealing but she
also supplied them with pictures of the drugs and cash hidden at the jane
street residence.
on several occasions during her statements
to police she told them that the defendant does not keep his drugs at the keele
street residence, but rather in a storage compartment in the basement of the
keele street building. yet, d.c. mcgill failed to set that out clearly and, as
he conceded in his cross-examination, mistakenly swore that ms. hoang told
police that there would be drugs at the keele street
residence
when he
meant to say the jane street residence.
the ito requires significant amplification
and excision so that it conforms with ms. hoang’s disclosure to police.
r.
v. araujo
,
2000 scc 65
after that amplification and excision, the
ito could
not
support the issuance of a warrant for the search of the keele
street residence.  the search of that property thus constituted a breach of the
applicant’s s.8
charter
rights.
the information supplied by ms. hoang is
very detailed and compelling as concerns the jane street residence. other
information concerning cars associated to the defendant at the two residences
was corroborated by police surveillance. that the defendant lived at the jane
street residence was corroborated by police investigation. ms. hoang’s
relationship with the defendant tends to support the accuracy and reliability
of her account as to the goings on in the defendant’s life and at the jane
street residence.
even after inserting the information police
knew about ms. hoang, that they did not include, the ito, after amplification
and excision, could amply support the issuance of a warrant for the search of
the jane street residence. there is thus no s.8
charter
breach as
concerns the issuance of that search warrant and the subsequent search of the jane
street residence.
(d)
the s. 10 application
the defendant was arrested immediately upon
the police entering the jane street residence just after midnight on april 24,
2023. he was told that he was being arrested for domestic assault. while it was
clear to him that the police were executing a search warrant at the jane street
residence, nothing was said to him about the keele street search, or any drug investigation
or charges.
several officers involved in the arrest,
transport and booking of the defendant testified. body-worn camera footage was
played for the court. the defendant did not testify.
the evidence on the application leads me to
make the following findings of fact.
the defendant was read his rights to counsel
in a timely fashion upon his arrest and he told the arresting officer as well
as the transporting officers just before being loaded into the back of a police
car that he wanted to speak to his own lawyer. he also asked what the search
warrant was for, and the arresting officer did not answer that question. the
defendant did not say who his lawyer was, nor did any of the police officers
ask him for the identity of his lawyer of choice.
p.c. sutton, the arresting officer, whose
testimony i accept on this point, testified that he told the defendant he could
use his cell phone to call his lawyer immediately, but that he would not be
given any privacy for such a call. the defendant said he would wait until he
could have privacy and would call from the station.
transporting officer judah admitted that he
did not tell the booking sergeant that the defendant wanted to contact his own
lawyer even though he heard p.c. just tell the defendant at the scene of the
arrest that the police would help him contact his own lawyer once back at the
station.
according to p.c. just and p.c. khawaja, who
testified as to what occurred at the booking phase after arrival at the station,
the defendant’s booking began at 12:54 am and was completed by 1:03 am. the
defendant was placed in a cell and arrangements were made at 1:43 am for the
defendant to speak to duty counsel, which he did at 1:50 am.
no officers testified that the defendant had
ever said that he decided to speak to duty counsel rather than his own lawyer.
p.c. sutton returned to the station some
time after 3:18 am. he advised the defendant of the drug charges at 5:26 am. he
assumed (wrongly) that the transporting officers had told the booking sergeant
about the defendant’s wish to speak to his own lawyer and that arrangements had
already been made for the defendant to do so. he learned that no such
arrangements had yet been made and the defendant told him he wanted to speak to
a lawyer named bill mckenzie. p.c. just then looked up mr. mckenzie’s phone
number, called it and left a message. p.c. just then offered the defendant
another duty counsel call and the defendant accepted that offer. contact
between the defendant and duty counsel then re-occurred at 5:37 am.
the defendant was not questioned by police
that morning.
the defendant alleges a breach of both
sections 10(a) and (b) of the
charter
.
as concerns the s.10(a) duty on the police
to promptly inform the defendant of the reasons for his detention, the leading
authorities on the subject are:
r. v. mann
,
2004 scc 52
at para.
21
;
r.
v. evans
,
1991 canlii 98 (scc)
, 1 scr 869 at para.
35
; and
r. v. smith
,
1991 canlii 91 (scc)
, 1
scr 714 at para.
28
.
as mclachlin j. (as she then was) held in
r.
v. smith
, supra at para. 28:
the accused need not be aware of the
precise charge faced. nor need the accused be made aware of all the factual
details of the case. what is required is that he or she be possessed of
sufficient information to allow making an informed and appropriate decision as
to whether to speak to a lawyer or not. the emphasis should be on the reality
of the total situation as it impacts on the understanding of the accused,
rather than on technical detail of what the accused may or may not have been
told.
in
mann
, supra
at para.
21
, the supreme
court put it this way:
section 10(a) of the
charter
provides
that “[e]veryone has the right on arrest or detention to be informed promptly
of the reasons therefor”. at a minimum, individuals who are detained for
investigative purposes must therefore be advised, in clear and simple language,
of the reasons for the detention.
section 10(a) requires that police inform
the detainee not just what he is being arrested for but also why he is being
detained for investigation. the defendant was arrested for assault, but he was
also detained because the police had a warrant and reasonable grounds to search
his home for drugs. as he was being marched off, the defendant was promptly
told he was under arrest for assault, and while he was told that a warrant was
being executed at the jane street residence, he was not told about the fact
that the police believed he was a drug dealer nor that there were two searches
being conducted nor that the searches were for drugs, until several hours
later, after drugs were found and the decision was made to charge him
accordingly.
as a result of this failure to fully inform
the defendant about the drug investigation he was not able to fully exercise
his right to the advice of counsel.
as concerns s. 10(b), the defendant promptly
told the police that he wanted to speak to his own lawyer. yet, the
transporting officers, who knew this, did not inform the booking sergeant.
instead, the defendant was immediately put in touch with duty counsel.
in the result, the police breached the
defendant’s s. 10(a) and 10(b) rights.
(e)
the failure to file a timely return after the
execution of the warrant
an agreed statement of fact was filed that
stated as follows:
on may 20, 2023, pc ward sent a form 5.2 report to a
justice in relation to this case to the justice of the peace. the report to a
justice is attached to as “appendix a”.
pc ward only attached one exhibit list to the report to a
justice, which was the exhibit list for the search of 510-2800 keele street.
there was a separate exhibit list for 70-2901 jane street.
in a will say provided to the defence on november 21, 2024,
pc ward explained that she was not aware that a second exhibit list existed.
the will say is attached as “appendix b”.
a working copy of the report to a justice
was provided to the defence on october 9, 2024. on the same date, dc wilkins,
the officer in charge, realized that pc ward had failed to attach the exhibit
list for 70-2901 jane street to the report to a justice. dc wilkins prepared a
new report to a justice with the exhibit list for 70-2901 jane street attached
and filed it with the justice of the peace on october 9, 2024. the new report
to a justice is attached as “appendix c”.
section 489.1
of the
criminal code
imposes
a very specific duty on police officers following a seizure:
restitution of property or
report by peace officer
489.1 (1)
subject to this or any
other act of parliament, where a peace officer has seized anything under a
warrant issued under this act or under section 487.11 or 489 or otherwise in
the execution of duties under this or any other act of parliament, the peace officer
shall, as soon as is practicable,
(a)
where the peace officer is satisfied,
(i)
that there is no dispute
as to who is lawfully entitled to possession of the thing seized, and
(ii)
that the continued
detention of the thing seized is not required for the purposes of any
investigation or a preliminary inquiry, trial or other proceeding,
return the thing seized, on being issued a receipt
therefor, to the person lawfully entitled to its possession and report to the
justice who issued the warrant or some other justice for the same territorial
division or, if no warrant was issued, a justice having jurisdiction in respect
of the matter, that he has done so; or
(b)
where the peace officer is
not satisfied as described in subparagraphs (a)(i) and (ii),
(i)
bring the thing seized
before the justice referred to in paragraph (a), or
(ii)
report to the justice that
he has seized the thing and is detaining it or causing it to be detained
to be dealt with by the justice in accordance with
subsection 490(1).
section 489.1 has long been considered a
“gateway” into the judicial supervision provisions of s. 490.65 the supreme
court of canada considered the reporting requirements under
s. 489.1
“important
for
charter
purposes, as they mandate police accountability for seizures
that have not been judicially authorized”.
r. v. reeves
,
2018 scc 56 (canlii)
, 3 s.c.r.
531, at para
63
;
r. v. colarusso,
1994 canlii 134 (scc)
,
s.c.j. no. 2.  at para
15;
r. v. backhouse
,
2005 canlii 4937 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 754, at para
112
.
section 490 includes several provisions that
allow for judicial oversight of seized items. for instance, s. 490(2)
contemplates that a further application to a justice (and subsequent order) may
be required to continue the detention of any seized items beyond three months
of their seizure. importantly, s. 490 also includes several provisions that allow
for the return of seized items, whether by means of careful contemplation by
seizing officers or by means of an application by the items’ lawful owner(s)
(s. 490(10)). without the use of
s. 489.1
to bring seized items into the
purview of s. 490, the items seized by police exist in a jurisdictional limbo.
it follows from the requirements of
s. 489.1
and the importance of s. 490 that if seized property is detained without
compliance with either, then its continued detention is not authorized by law
and is therefore in breach of s. 8 of the
charter
.
r. v.
garcia-machado
,
2015 onca 569
.
the report to a justice for the items seized
from the jane street residence was not provided until october 10, 2024.
consequently, what transpired from april 24, 2023, until that time was a
continued unlawful detention of the seized items –that lasted for seventeen
months and two weeks.
section 489.1 of the
code
requires
that the report to justice be completed and submitted “as soon as is
practicable.” a specific timeline is not built into the legislation, but it
appears what is commonly contemplated is a matter of days, not years. clear
breaches of
charter
s. 8 have been found when a delay of three months took
place.
the late return re the seizure at the jane
street residence constituted a s.8
charter
breach, although, as i will
re-iterate below, it was minor and had next to no impact on the defendant’s
charter
rights.
(f)
section 24(2)
there are three
charter
breaches to
consider.
•
the warrant for the search of the keele street
residence could not have issued on the amended ito.
•
the defendant’s s. 10(a) and 10(b) rights were
violated.
•
the filing of the search warrant return
regarding the jane street residence was late.
section 24(2) must be applied twice: once to
determine the admissibility of the evidence seized at the jane street residence
and again to determine the admissibility of the evidence seized at the keele
st. residence.
whether the admission of the evidence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute is governed by the test
first articulated in the supreme court’s decision in
r. v. grant
,
2009
scc 32
at para.
71
:
[w]
hether
the admission of evidence obtained in breach of the charter would             bring
the administration of justice into disrepute engages three avenues of inquiry,
each rooted in the public interests engaged by s. 24(2), viewed in a long-term,
forward-looking and societal perspective. when faced with an    application
for exclusion under s. 24(2), a court must assess and balance the effect of
admitting the evidence on society’s confidence in the justice system             having
regard to: (1) the seriousness of the charter -infringing state conduct
(admission may send the message the justice system condones serious state
misconduct), (2) the impact of the breach on the charter-protected interests of
the accused (admission may send the message that individual rights count for
little), and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its
merits. the court’s role on a s. 24(2) application is to balance the
assessments under each of these lines of inquiry to determine whether,
considering all the circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
see too
r. v. tim
,
2022 scc 12 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 12
dealing first with the keele st. search, i
find the two
charter
breaches associated with that search to be serious.
there were insufficient grounds to support
the issuance of the warrant. even though a warrant did issue, it only issued
because of the extremely careless drafting of the ito. the seriousness of the
s. 8 breach is exacerbated by the breaches of section 10(a) and 10(b) as
concerns the keele st. search.
as concerns the impact of the s. 8 breach on
the
charter
protected rights of the defendant, it too is serious. while
the record is not clear as to the degree that the keele street address was a
residence of the defendant, the information conveyed to the police by ms. hoang
was to that effect.
the impact of the s. 10 breaches is also significant.
the defendant spent several hours without access to his counsel of choice, who
might well have been available to speak to the defendant earlier had the phone
call to him been made earlier in the morning, as it should have been.
the seriousness of the s.10 breaches is
somewhat mitigated by the fact that the police did not seek to gather evidence
from the defendant prior to his contact with duty counsel, and belatedly, his
counsel of choice (nor thereafter, it would appear).
the first two
grant
factors weigh
heavily in favour of exclusion of the evidence seized from the keele street
address.
the third
grant
factor, i.e.
society’s interest in having the keele street drug charges adjudicated on their
merits weighs in favour of inclusion. the evidence is real and reliable, and it
is crucial to the crown’s case.
balancing the three
grant
factors
leads me to conclude that the admission of the evidence seized during the keele
street search would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. that
evidence is excluded.
as concerns the application of s. 24(2) to
the evidence seized from the jane street residence, i come to the opposite
conclusion.
there is no s. 8 breach as concerns the
search and seizure at the jane street residence.
the s.10(a) breach is less serious as
concerns the jane street residence as compared to the keele st. residence. the
defendant was told nothing about the keele st. search, but he did know that the
jane street residence was being searched.
the s. 10(b) breach is serious, as was its
impact in the jane street residence context.
the third
grant
factor weighs in
favour of admission regarding jane street in the same way as it does in the
keele street context.
the failure to file a report pursuant to
s.489.1 is a breach only as concerns the jane street search, but i find that the
conduct of the police officers was not serious. rather, it was inadvertent and
not in bad faith. it was rectified immediately upon police discovering their
oversight. additionally, there was no impact on the defendant as a result. the
items seized would have undoubtedly been held by the police in any event.
finally, as in the keele street analysis, society
has a strong interest in adjudicating this fentanyl case on its merits.
when balancing the
grant
factors as
concerns the jane street residence, s. 24(2) of the
charter
favours the
admission of the evidence.
i reiterate that the difference in treatment
of the admissibility of the keele street evidence and the jane street evidence
largely comes down to the fact that the search of the jane street residence did
not constitute a s.8 breach.
(g)
conclusion
the evidence seized from the search of the
keele street residence is excluded. the evidence seized from the search of the
jane street residence is admitted.
c.
the
trial
(a)
introduction
when police arrived at 2901 jane street just
after midnight on april 24, 2023, the defendant was there with a middle-aged
woman who identified herself as anh duong, and two children. the defendant was arrested,
and the residence was then searched. no drugs were in plain view. they were all
well hidden throughout the residence as well as under a paving stone in the
back yard and in a back yard shed: 16 grams of fentanyl, 24 grams of crack
cocaine, 9.5 grams of powdered cocaine, 33.8 grams of ketamine, 4.82 grams of
codeine, $1,455 in cash, unused zip lock baggies, three digital scales and a cell
phone.
the crown called several search and exhibit
officers. the crown also tendered several video and photo exhibits pertinent to
the search. the defence called no evidence. the defendant admitted that he was the
registered owner of the property and that whoever possessed the drugs,
possessed them for the purpose of trafficking.
the crown concedes that this is an “all or
nothing case”, i.e. that given the lack of precision as to what drugs were
found where, it is incumbent on the crown to prove the defendant’s possession
of all the drugs found in the residence.
(b)
the search
the residence at 2901 jane street had a
living room and kitchen on the main floor and three bedrooms upstairs. the
living room contained a mattress.
hidden drugs were found throughout the main
floor, back yard and the shed.
many pieces of identification belonging to
the defendant with the jane street address along with his wallet and car keys were
found in the residence. male adult clothing was found in one bedroom. an
envelope addressed to the defendant at the keele street residence was found at
the jane street residence. an envelope addressed to him at jane was also found.
the master bedroom contained women’s
clothing. one of the upstairs bedrooms was clearly a child or children’s
bedroom.
ms. hoang, in her earlier statements to
police, directed police to the shed in the backyard where some drugs were
found.
no forensic evidence linked the defendant to
any of the drugs found in the residence.
small weigh scales were found in plain
sight.
(c)
the law of possession
the law of possession is succinctly set out
in
r. v. bains
,
2015 onca 677
at paras.
154-157
:
section 2(1)
of the
controlled
drugs and substances act
, s.c. 1996, c. 19, as amended ("
cdsa
"),
incorporates the definition of "possession" found in
s. 4(3)
of the
criminal
code
so that any
cdsa
offence of which possession is an essential
element may be proven in any manner permitted by s. 4(3) of the
criminal
code
.
under s. 4(3), possession includes
personal possession, constructive possession and joint possession:
r. v.
morelli
,
1 s.c.r. 253
,
s.c.j. no. 8
,
2010 scc 8
, at para.
15
.
knowledge and control are essential elements in both personal and constructive
possession:
morelli
, at para.
15
.
constructive possession does
not
involve
an accused having physical custody of a subject matter. constructive possession
is established where an accused has the subject matter in the actual possession
or custody of another person, or in any place, whether belonging to or occupied
by the accused or not, for the benefit of the accused or someone else:
morelli
,
at para.
17
. to establish constructive possession, the crown must prove beyond
a reasonable doubt that an accused [
morelli
, at para.
17]
(i) knows the character of the object;
(ii) knowingly puts or keeps the object in a place;
and
(iii) intends to have the object in
the place for his or her use or benefit or the use or benefit of some other
person.
as with other offences, crown counsel
may prove the essential elements of constructive possession by direct evidence,
by circumstantial evidence or by a combination of direct and circumstantial
evidence. where the subject matter of which an accused is alleged to be in
possession is a controlled substance of significant value, it may be open to a
trier of fact to infer not only knowledge of the nature of the subject, but
also knowledge of the substance itself:
r. v. blondin
,
1970 canlii 1006 (bc ca)
,
b.c.j. no.
656
,
2 c.c.c. (2d) 118 (c.a.)
, at p. 121
c.c.c.;
r. v. fredericks
,
o.j. no. 5549 (c.a.)
, at paras. 3-4
;
r. v. to
,
b.c.j. no.
1700
,
1992 canlii 913 (c.a.)
; and
r. v. bryan
,
o.j. no. 673
,
2013
onca 97
, at para.
11
. it is a reasonable inference that such a valuable
quantity of drugs would not be entrusted to anyone who did not know the nature
of the contents of the bag or other container.
the crown’s case against the defendant relies
exclusively on circumstantial evidence. i must thus heed the instructions of
our court of appeal in
r. v. lights
,
2020 onca 128
at paras.
35-38
where
watt j.a. summarized the law in this area:
when the crown's case consists wholly
or substantially of circumstantial evidence, the standard of proof requires the
trier of fact be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused's guilt
is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence as a whole:
r.
v. villaroman
,
2016 scc 33
,
1 s.c.r. 1000
, at para.
20
.
to determine if the circumstantial
evidence meets the required standard of proof, the trier of fact must keep in mind
that it is the evidence, assessed as a whole, that must meet this standard of
proof, not each individual piece of evidence that is but a link in the chain of
proof:
r. v. smith
,
2016 onca 25
,
333 c.c.c. (3d) 534
, at paras.
81-82
;
r.
v. morin
,
1988 canlii 8 (scc)
,
2 s.c.r. 345
, at pp. 360-61
;
côté v. the king
(1941),
1941 canlii 348 (scc)
,
77 c.c.c. 75 (s.c.c.)
, at p. 76
.
inferences consistent with innocence
need not arise from proven facts. rather, they may arise from a lack of evidence:
villaroman
, at para.
35
. accordingly, a trier of fact must consider
other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities inconsistent with
guilt so long as these theories and possibilities are grounded on logic and experience.
they must not amount to fevered imaginings or speculation. while the crown must
negate these reasonable possibilities, it need not negate every possible
conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent
with an accused's innocence:
villaroman
, at paras.
37-38
.
see also
r.
v. bagshaw
,
1971 canlii 13 (scc)
,
s.c.r. 2
, at p. 8
.
watt j. a. in
lights
,
supra
at
para.
50
reminds us that:
when things are found in a premises
or place occupied by an accused, no presumption of knowledge and control arises
from proof of occupancy. put simply, occupancy does not create a presumption of
possession:
r. v. watson
,
2011 onca 437
, at para.
13
;
r. v. lincoln
,
2012 onca 542
, at para.
3
.
(d)
analysis
that the defendant owned the residence
supports the inference that he controlled access to the unit.
r. v. lights
,
supra
, at para.
104
.  the presence of his personal identification and
wallet supports the inference that he lived there.
there were, however, other persons who also lived
there. the master bedroom was occupied by a woman, perhaps the middle-aged
woman who was there when police arrived, or ms. hoang, who, having directed
police to the drugs in the shed, clearly knew where some of the drugs were
hidden. breast milk was found in the freezer. neither of these women testified.
there is no evidence that the female occupant of the premises (whoever she was)
could not have secreted drugs throughout the residence without the defendant’s
knowledge. the same can be said for the hidden cash.
the evidence suggests that the drugs were
worth approximately $8,000. this evidence does not support the crown’s argument
that the drugs were so valuable that no one would have hidden them in the
defendant’s residence without his knowledge.
the finding of scales in plain view is equivocal.
they may have been for kitchen use. even if the finding of the scales supports
the inference that the defendant was a drug user, it does not prove that he was
a drug trafficker, nor that he knew other residents of the home were selling
drugs.
the crown also argues that even if the
defendant did not know the precise location of the hidden drugs, he must have
known that the woman perpetrator was dealing drugs out of the residence and
would thus have been at least wilfully blind to the presence of drugs in the
home. no evidence was led on the trial portion of the proceedings that would
support the notion that the relationship between him and either potential
female perpetrator was such as to support this submission.
that one of the two women referred to might
have hidden the drugs in the residence without the defendant’s knowledge is a
reasonable available inference on the circumstantial evidence presented in this
case.
d.
concusion
the charges against the defendant are
dismissed.
released on december 22,
2025
justice
russell silverstein