ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. threja
, 2025 oncj 635
date:
2025 12 02
court
file no.:  brampton #24-31101792
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
kashish threja
before
justice f. a. mccracken
heard
on july 10, 11, october 1, 23, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 2, 2025
m. moser............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
e. sinclair  ....................................................... counsel
for the defendant kashish threja
mccracken j.:
this matter arises from a motor vehicle collision on february 8, 2024,
which resulted in mr. kashish threja being charged with the offences that were
the subject of this trial – impaired operation and over 80. the defence has
advanced a
charter
application alleging breaches of sections 8, 9 and
10(b).  the defence concedes that the over 80 charge rises and falls on this
application.  the impaired count does not.
the crown called three witnesses on this trial. the first was danial
danial, a civilian who testified that he was driving his black honda cr-v
through the intersection of soft needlewood and peter robertson at
approximately 12:42am on february 8, 2024. he stated that the intersection was
controlled by an all-way stop. after stopping and proceeding into the
intersection, his vehicl­e was struck on the front passenger side by another
vehicle approaching from his right. he described the impact as sudden and
forceful, causing both vehicles to move and deploy their airbags. he did not
see the other vehicle before the collision and could not estimate its speed
other than to say it was “fast.” following the impact, he remained in his
vehicle for about a minute, feeling shocked and disoriented, before exiting and
calling a friend. he did not speak to anyone at the scene other than the
police, who arrived shortly thereafter. he also testified to injuries to his
thumb, neck, shoulders, and ankle, which required hospital treatment and
ongoing physiotherapy.  importantly, mr. danial’s account was not known to the police
at the time that mr. threja was arrested and the breath demand was made.  i am aware
that i cannot rely on it in assessing the officers’ grounds.
the second witness was constable brianna gilfoy, the arresting officer.
she testified that she arrived at the scene at approximately 12:32am and
initially conducted a highway traffic act investigation. she observed two
severely damaged vehicles with deployed airbags and was advised by firefighters
that the occupants had been medically cleared. constable gilfoy identified the
accused as one of the drivers and described him as appearing “very
disoriented,” with red, glossy, bloodshot eyes. she testified that she detected
an odour of alcohol emanating from his breath and observed several empty beer
cans in his vehicle. she asked the accused three times for his driver’s
license, which he failed to produce. based on these observations, she formed
grounds to arrest him for impaired operation at 12:35am. constable gilfoy
acknowledged under cross-examination that her notes were not strictly
chronological and that she exaggerated on video about the number of times she
requested the license. she also conceded that her demonstration of
disorientation was “dramatic,” but maintained that her observations were
genuine.
the third witness was constable amanpreet kandola, who arrived shortly
after the arrest and took over custody of the accused when it became apparent
that he preferred to receive his rights in punjabi. kandola testified that she
began reading the accused his rights to counsel in punjabi at 12:47am (i note
here, that the body-worn camera footage shows this as 12:46am), followed by the
caution at 12:51am and the breath demand at 12:52am. she confirmed that the
accused asked to speak with his brother during the rights advisory but did not
indicate that the purpose was to obtain a lawyer’s contact information. kandola
facilitated contact with duty counsel, who ultimately spoke with the accused in
punjabi before the breath tests were administered.
on the
charter
voir dire, mr. threja testified that he asked to
speak with his brother because he wanted his brother to provide him with a
lawyer’s contact information. he claimed that he repeated this request both at
the scene and at the station, but acknowledged that he did not tell the
officers the reason for the request. he stated that he felt prevented from
making the call because the officers were “yelling” and appeared aggressive,
which led him to believe he was not permitted to speak with his brother. he
confirmed that he ultimately spoke with duty counsel in punjabi before
providing breath samples, but maintained that this was not the lawyer he wished
to consult.
the issues
the issues that i need to decide in this case are as follows:
first, whether the arrest and subsequent breath demand contravened
sections 8 and 9 of the
charter
. the defence contends that cst. gilfoy
lacked reasonable and probable grounds to believe the accused’s ability to
operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol, rendering the detention
arbitrary and the seizure unlawful.
second, whether there was an infringement of section 10(b) arising from
delay in the provision of the right to counsel “without delay.” the accused was
arrested at 12:35am, yet his rights were not communicated in punjabi—a language
he requested and understood—until 12:46am the defence submits that this
interval constitutes an unjustified suspension of a constitutional guarantee.
third, whether the police failed to respect the accused’s right to
counsel of choice under section 10(b). while being advised of his rights, the
accused asked to speak with his brother. he testified that his purpose was to
obtain his brother’s lawyer’s contact information. the defence argues that the
officers’ failure to inquire further or facilitate this request amounted to a
breach of the
charter
.
fourth,
the determination of the charge of impaired operation, which requires an
assessment of whether the evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused’s ability to operate a conveyance was impaired by alcohol.
issue #1: grounds for arrest and demand
mr.
threja asserts that the police violated his right to be free from unreasonable
search and seizure – and arbitrary detention – by arresting him and demanding
samples of his breath without the requisite grounds.  specifically, he alleges
that the police lacked grounds that he was impaired.
as
mr. threja’s breath samples were seized without prior judicial authorization,
that seizure is presumptively unreasonable. the onus rests on the crown to
justify the demand for samples of his breath.
section
320.28
of the
criminal code
authorizes a peace officer to make a breath
demand where that officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has
operated a conveyance while their ability to do so was impaired by alcohol.  it
is this section of the
criminal code
that the crown and police rely upon
to justify the breath demand in this case.
reasonable
grounds contemplates a higher standard than ‘reasonable suspicion’ – which is a
lower standard that can justify an approved screening device demand.  however,
it is not the same as a ‘prima facie’ case, nor does it approach ‘proof beyond
a reasonable doubt’ required for conviction.
reasonable
grounds includes both a subjective and objective component.  the officer making
the demand must subjectively believe that the statutory pre-condition is met –
that is that mr. threja operated a conveyance while his ability to do so was
impaired by alcohol.  and, that belief must be supported by grounds that are
objectively reasonable.  see
storrey
,
1990 canlii 125 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 241 at paras.
16-17
.
the
subjective branch of reasonable grounds to believe only requires that an
officer have an honest belief that the person has operated a conveyance while
their ability to do so was impaired by alcohol.  in the context of this case,
as long as i accept constable gilfoy’s evidence that she had this subjective
belief – which was not seriously contested by defence, and which i do accept –
the subjective branch of the test is met.  see
rodriguez
,
o.j.
no. 2592 (s.c.j.) at para. 20
and
tanner
,
o.j. no. 3357 (c.j.) at
para. 23
.
parliament
did not denote degrees of impairment when setting the standard for either the
offence of impaired driving or making a breath demand.  any impairment – even
slight impairment due to consumption of alcohol – is sufficient.
i
accept constable gilfoy’s evidence that she observed the accused’s eyes to be
red, glossy, and bloodshot. i also accept her observation that the accused
appeared disoriented. while there are alternative explanations for
disorientation, including the fact that the accused had just been involved in a
collision, the police are not required to engage in the kind of judicial
weighing that a court has the luxury of performing after the fact. i further
accept that constable gilfoy detected an odour of alcohol emanating from the
accused’s breath. she provided an adequate explanation for the sequence of her
notes, and as is evident from the body-worn camera footage, her notes were not
made contemporaneously with the formation of grounds.
i
also accept that she observed beer cans in the vehicle, albeit in the passenger
areas. while one can in the console was a coke can, the presence of beer cans,
taken together with her other observations, is a factor supporting her grounds.
i
do not find that mr. threja’s failure to produce a driver’s license after
repeated requests meaningfully contributed to the grounds. the body-worn camera
footage played during the trial demonstrates that the accused was responsive to
the officer’s requests. constable gilfoy acknowledged exaggerating the number
of times she asked for the license when speaking to constable kandola; however,
when considered alongside her other observations and my own review of the
footage, i do not find that this exaggeration undermines her credibility or
reliability.
the
circumstances of the collision do not assist in supporting grounds in this
case. constable gilfoy testified that she did not consider the collision
because its circumstances were not known to her at the time of arrest and
demand.
each
of these grounds, taken individually, may be weak and capable of alternative
explanations. however, when considered cumulatively and in light of
parliament’s decision to authorize a demand where impairment by alcohol may
range from slight to extreme, i am satisfied that constable gilfoy’s grounds
were objectively reasonable. the arrest and the subsequent breath demand were
authorized by law. there is no breach of sections 8 or 9 of the
charter
.
issue #2: section 10(b) delay and language
constable
gilfoy arrested mr. threja at 12:35am. she attempted to inform him of his right
to counsel at 12:39pm but aborted that attempt at 12:41am when it became clear
that he did not understand and when he asked to be spoken to in punjabi.
constable kandola, the other officer who was on-scene with constable gilfoy
spoke punjabi.  she began informing mr. threja of his right to counsel in
punjabi at 12:46am.
on
behalf of mr. threja, counsel argues that this 11-minute delay amounts to a
breach of his section 10(b)
charter
right to be informed of his right to
counsel
without delay
.
i
intend to review the evidence in more detail, but before i do so i will outline
the governing principles that apply this issue.
section
10(b) of the
charter
states that “everyone has the right on arrest or
detention to retain and instruct counsel
without delay
and to be
informed of that right.”
in
suberu
2009 scc 33
the supreme court of canada confirmed that “without
delay” means “immediately” for the purposes of this right.  that immediacy
requirement though is subject to concerns for officer safety, or safety of the
public, and other such limitations as prescribed by law and justified under
section 1 of the
charter
.  see
suberu
at para.
42
.
as
the court of appeal held in
la
2018 onca 830
at para
39
, a generalized
theoretical concern for officer safety cannot justify a suspension of a
detainee’s right to counsel.  rather, the inquiry must be fact and context-specific
based on the evidence heard in any particular case.
courts
have reached different conclusions on whether various delays comply with or
breach the immediacy requirement.
for
example, in
davis
2023 onca 227
, the court of appeal agreed with both
the trial judge and the summary conviction appeal judge that an 8-minute delay
amounted to a breach of the immediacy requirement.  importantly, in that case,
the arresting officer could not account satisfactorily of the delay, had no
notes of what transpired during the delay, and there was other evidence that
contradicted the officer’s testimony on this point.
by
way of contrast, in
pileggi
2021 onca 4
, the court of appeal held that a
“brief” 7-minute delay for the police to secure the residence in the context of
the execution of a search warrant did not violate the immediacy requirement.
citing
suberu
, the court held that there were legitimate officer safety
concerns justifying the delay.
similarly,
in
haist
2023 onca 465
, the court of appeal found no fault with a
5-minute delay to secure the accused for safety.
there
are countless other cases that find both breach and no breach of the immediacy
requirement.  but the governing principle remains that a detainee must be
informed of his or her right to counsel immediately.  that immediacy
requirement only yields to case-specific officer or public safety concerns, or
other limitations can be justified under s. 1 of the
charter
.
as
i have already indicated, mr. threja was arrested at 12:35am. he was handcuffed
and escorted through the scene – which was crowded with onlookers – to a police
cruiser, arriving about 1-minute later, at 12:36am.  upon arrival constable
gilfoy instructs constable kandola to get the other driver’s information and
says that she will be doing a ‘quick patdown’.  while she appears to be putting
on disposable gloves, she continues to brief constable kandola.  both officers
appear to be repeatedly approached by one or more of the onlookers.
constable
gilfoy conducts a patdown search of mr.  threja, finishing it at 12:37,
whereupon she secures him in the back of her cruiser.
starting
at 12:38, constable gilfoy gives constable kandola further instructions about
the investigation, and then interacts briefly with a firefighter who approached
her.
she
begins informing mr. threja of his right to counsel at 12:39, in english.  in
response to being informed that he was being “arrested for impaired operation”,
mr. threja says “[w]hat are you saying?”  when pressed by constable gilfoy to
respond yes or no, mr. threja responds “yes” to being asked whether he
understands.  however, when he is informed that he has the right to retain and
instruct counsel without delay he – among other things – complains that he does
not understand the language of what constable gilfoy is saying.  when constable
gilfoy tells him that he is speaking english to her now, he says he has only
limited english.
at
12:41, when constable gilfoy repeats what she told him, he tells her that he
does not understand and says “please punjabi”.  at this point, constable gilfoy
stops, appears to make a note of the response, closes the door to her cruiser,
and moves across the scene of the collision to speak with constable kandola –
who speaks punjabi.  on the way, constable gilfoy has to stop an suv from
turning into the scene.
at
12:42, constable gilfoy explains the issue to constable kandola and says that
she might have to explain it in punjabi.  they discuss the logistics of
transferring custody of mr. threja from one to the other along with division of
responsibilities for the investigation and collision scene.
at
12:43, constable gilfoy shares her grounds for arrest with constable kandola.
at
12:44, she intervenes when a tow truck enters the collision scene to instruct
it not to hook up the vehicles.  shortly after, within the minute, yet another
onlooker approaches constable gilfoy expressing concern about someone else who
was involved in the collision, apparently as an occupant rather than driver.
at
12:46, constable gilfoy finishes briefing constable kandola.  she tells mr.
threja that he is going to a different cruiser.  constable kandola takes over
physical custody of mr. threja, and on the walk to her cruiser begins informing
him of his right to counsel in a language that he requested and understands –
punjabi.
constable
gilfoy testified about the reason for various periods of delay.  constable
gilfoy testified that while she understood a detainee must be informed of their
right to counsel immediately, she was concerned about officer safety given that
there were “a tonne of pedestrians” and that she felt that if she had people
approaching her and she had her back to them reading rtcs, she would be in a
vulnerable position.  she highlighted that there was a lot going on and the
number of people approaching her – a firefighter, numerous onlookers – and the
need to direct traffic – for example, as highlighted in the body-worn camera
footage, an suv apparently about to turn into the scene of the collision, and a
tow truck driver.  these concerns about the other individuals present and the
need to manage the scene were corroborated by the body-worn camera footage
filed on this trial.
i
accept constable gilfoy’s evidence about the justification for the delay in
informing mr. threja of his right to counsel in a language that he understands,
despite the presence of constable kandola, who speaks punjabi.
while
the totality of the delay was 11-minutes, that number does not tell the whole
story.
for
the first four minutes of that delay, constable gilfoy was engaging in tasks
that are well-established to justify a brief delay in right to counsel –
handcuffing the accused, escorting him to a secure location, and then
conducting a brief patdown search.
she
then attempted to inform of his right to counsel.  within 2-minutes she
determines that mr. threja does not understand, and in the next minute seeks
constable kandola’s assistance.  the time is now 12:42am.  within about
4-minutes – at 12:46 – constable kandola begins explaining mr. threja’s rights
to him in punjabi.  during that intervening 4-minutes – while speaking with the
only other officer on-scene – constable gilfoy was approached by an onlooker
who had some apparent concerns, had to direct a tow-truck driver not to hook up
the vehicles involved in the collision, and – as she pointed out – was
surrounded by a ‘tonne’ of pedestrians.
in
short, i find that the delay was justified both by (i) the initial officer
safety-focused tasks of securing and searching mr. threja, (ii) the initial and
very brief attempt by constable gilfoy to inform him of his right to counsel,
and (iii) timely interventions to maintain and manage the scene of a collision
as one of only two officers present.
i
also do not accept the defence argument that the failure to have constable
kandola inform the accused initially of his right to counsel – being the
punjabi-speaking officer on-scene – amounted to a violation of the accused’s s.
10(b)
charter
rights.  mr. threja was initially conversing with the
officers in english.  and, when constable gilfoy became aware – within minutes
of his arrest – of the presence of special circumstances grounding mr. threja’s
lack of understanding of his right to counsel, she approached constable
kandola.
in
short, i find that the 11-minute delay in informing mr. threja of his right to
counsel in punjabi does not violate the immediacy requirement of s. 10(b) of
the
charter
.
even
if i am wrong, i would not have excluded the breath samples under s. 24(2) of
the
charter
.
here,
i am mindful in assessing compliance with the immediacy requirement not to
confuse the analysis of whether the right was breached with the analysis of the
impact of that infringement under s. 24(2) – see
ahmed
2022 onca 640
at
para.
36
.
it
is important not to lose sight of what happened in this case.  the accused was
a driver involved in a serious collision with another member of our community –
danial danial.  on mr. danial’s evidence, which i accept, mr. threja was at
fault for the collision, having run a stop sign.  the defence seeks to exclude
highly-reliable breath samples that would otherwise all-but establish his guilt
of the excess blood alcohol charge.  on this alleged breach, that exclusion
would be grounded in an 11-minute roadside delay after which the accused was
informed of his right to counsel – at the roadside – in his first language.
it
is noteworthy that peel police were able to provide rights in the accused’s
first language within minutes of arrest.  especially when viewed in light of
the supreme court’s comments at paragraph 111 of
grant
with respect to
breath samples, i would not have excluded them.  even had i found a violation
of mr. threja’s right to counsel – which often is viewed as quite serious – i
would find that the balancing of the seriousness, impact, and society’s
interests in an adjudication of the trial on its merits did not favour
exclusion.
issue #3: third-party contact and right to counsel
mr.
threja also urges me to find that the police violated his right to counsel of
choice.  while being informed of his right to counsel, he told constable
kandola that he wanted to speak with his brother.  he testified that he
repeated that request both at the scene and the police station.  he claims that
the reason he wanted to speak with his brother was to be put in contact with
counsel of choice.  accordingly, he argues that the failure to put him in
contact with his brother – or for the police to contact his brother – prevented
him from exercising his
charter
right to counsel of choice.
where
a detainee does not tell police the reason why he wants to speak with a third
party, there is no obligation on the police to determine why such a request was
made.  see
al hayawi
2023 onsc 2578
,
cheema
2018 onsc 229
at
para.
31
, "when a detainee does not tell the police the reason why he or
she wishes to speak to a third party, there is no obligation on the police to
determine why the police made such a request", and
mumtaz
2019
onsc 468
at para.
25
.  i note that the latter two decisions –
cheema
and
mumtaz
are summary conviction appeal decisions, by which i am bound.
in
this case, mr. threja did not tell the police that he wanted to speak to his
brother in order to be put in contact with counsel of choice.  he gave evidence
that he did not do so because the officers were yelling at him and being
aggressive.  i reject that explanation.  mr. threja had no problem asserting
that he wanted to speak with his brother.  if the true reason why he wanted to
speak with his brother was to be put in contact with counsel there is nothing
on the evidence that i have heard or the behaviour of the officers that i have
watched on the body-worn camera that prevented him from doing so.  i reject mr.
threja’s evidence on this point.
that
is a full answer to this portion of the
charter
application.  there was
no breach of his right to counsel of choice by the police’s failure to accede
to his request to speak with his brother, or to make further inquiries of mr.
threja on this point.
i
note also that constable kandola testified – and i accept – that mr. threja did
not express any dissatisfaction with his call to duty counsel.
there
was no infringement of mr. threja’s s. 10(b)
charter
right to counsel of
choice.
to
summarize, i find no violation of mr. threja’s section 8, 9, or 10
charter
rights.  the defence application to exclude the breath samples is dismissed.
defence
counsel properly conceded during submissions that the over 80 count rises and
falls on the
charter
application.  in other words, the defence concedes
– in my view, properly – that with the admission of the breath samples, the
evidence establishes mr. threja’s guilt on that count beyond a reasonable
doubt.  i agree, and a finding of guilt will be entered on count 2.
issue #4: the impaired count
i
am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. threja operated a
conveyance while his ability to do so was impaired by alcohol.
i
have already reviewed constable gilfoy’s evidence in my analysis of the section
8 and 9
charter
application. i am mindful though that a finding of guilt
for impaired driving requires far more exacting proof than reasonable grounds.
i must be satisfied that the only reasonable inference from the evidence called
in this case is that mr. threja operated the conveyance while impaired by alcohol.
i must also consider presence of evidence supporting a finding that mr. threja
was not impaired – or the absence of evidence on this issue.
importantly,
the crown called evidence that was not available to constable gilfoy at the
time.  mr. danial testified about the circumstances of the collision that i
conclude was caused by mr. threja running an all-way stop.  i accept mr.
danial’s evidence.
the
unexplained collision – again, caused by mr. threja – combined with the
evidence of impairment that i have already outlined – in particular, red glossy
eyes, disorientation, the odour of alcohol on mr. threja’s breath – satisfies
me beyond a reasonable doubt that his ability to operate his vehicle was
impaired by alcohol.  the absence of other indicia – such as stumbling, which
was not observed by constable gilfoy, or slurring of speech – does not leave me
in a reasonable doubt.
given
my ruling on his statement, as well as the defence concession on the over 80,
there is no issue that mr. threja was the driver.  i conclude beyond a
reasonable doubt that he was impaired by alcohol at the time.
there
will be a finding of guilt on the charge of impaired operation – count 1.
released:  december 2, 2025
signed:
justice f. a. mccracken­