ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. herrington
, 2025 oncj 450
date:
2025 09 02
court
file no.:  23-48118181
toronto
region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
joseph herrington
before
justice c. faria
heard
on june 4, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on september 2, 2025
ellen an................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
marcus bornfreund.......................
counsel for the defendant joseph herrington
faria j.:
on april 7, 2025, i found joseph herrington
guilty of assaulting his intimate partner at the time, janice wu.
the matter was adjourned for
the preparation of a pre-sentence report (psr).
submissions were heard and supporting material
filed on june 4, 2025. as counsel for mr. herrington made several submissions
without supporting documents, the defence filled further material on june 24, 2025,
and the crown responded with material of its own.
these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts
on sunday september 24, 2023, mr. herrington was
a passenger in the family van, while ms. wu drove to a grocery store to pick up
items for dinner with another family with whom their eldest daughter had had a
sleepover. their other two children were in the back seat.
while on the way to the store, in the store, and
on the drive back home, mr. herrington berated ms. wu. he was furious the gas
light in the car was on. he criticized how she parallel parked. he yelled and
insulted her. he did not want to go to dinner with her and demanded to be
dropped off at home. ms. wu drove him back home. once she parked the car, mr.
herrington reached over and took the keys from the van, and ms. wu’s purse, and
went inside the home with both.
ms. wu followed in pursuit of her van keys and
purse, leaving the children in the van.
inside the home, ms. wu took mr. herrington’s
house keys from a bowl to negotiate getting her possessions back. an
altercation erupted.
mr. herrington became enraged and chased ms. wu
around the kitchen island. he swung at ms. wu with a closed fist but made no
contact. he kicked at her but made no contact. he then lunged at her and
grabbed her. he would not let go. she tried to push him off. the assault was
interrupted by a neighbour knocking at the door who heard the dispute and came
to ms. wu’s aid.
ii.
joseph herrington
mr. herrington is about to turn 48 years old. he
was 45 when he committed the offence.  he has no criminal record.
he is the eldest of two boys and grew up in a
small town in ontario. he described his mother as having “narcissistic traits” which
was “manipulative and confusing” for him growing up. his parents used physical
discipline and argued. he stated to the psr author that he grew up with the
same behaviour as that on the offence date.
he grew up working in the summers as a teenager.
he obtained two undergraduate degrees, and a masters degree. he was a
consultant for 20 years with one company and 5 years with another. he now works
for a “big real estate developer” since 2023.
mr. herrington stated he has no alcohol issues,
and in fact has a “very healthy” relationship with alcohol as he only drinks
two to three times a week with dinner. he has no physical or mental health
concerns. he has a group of supportive friends with whom he socializes.
mr. herrington is a volunteer level 3 certified
officiator at the toronto swim club (tsc) where 2 of his 3 children swim
competitively. he filed supporting documentation regarding the tsc family participation
policy, his deck logs, his official certification, future swimming events as
well as pictures of himself with his children at swim meets.
he was with ms. wu for 17 years and they have 3
children. he noted that everyone could see the “contempt and disdain” in the
relationship. he recognizes his children see the “mood” and “vibe” to be better
since the offence. he admitted their relationship was “not healthy with lots of
yelling.”
he is no longer involved with ms. wu and has
moved on to another relationship. joy savage, his new partner since june 2024, spoke
glowingly of mr. herrington to the psr author, and did the same when she read
her character letter to the court
.
she has noticed none of the negative characteristics ms. wu testified to in mr.
herrington and feels very safe with him, as does her 10-year-old daughter who
already loves mr. herrington.
since his arrest, mr. herrington has been going
to counselling with psychotherapist noah casey. a letter dated november 22,
2024
notes the work he did in 21 sessions
to understand healthy boundaries, though he maintained at the time, he had
never transgressed physical boundaries during his arguments with his spouse. mr.
herrington worked on non-violent communication, meditation, mindfulness, and
his grief over the dissolution of his relationship.
in a letter dated may 1, 2025
, noah casey notes 22 sessions
completed. this more recent letter no longer states that mr. herrington never
transgressed physical boundaries. this second letter also adds descriptors such
as “dramatic improvement” (pg. 1) and “marked” improvement (pg. 2) and that mr.
herrington “fully grasps the sanctity of physical boundaries” (pg. 3). mr.
herrington’s significant improvement must have been made during the one
additional session between letters, and after the finding of guilt.
mr. herrington expressed remorse to the psr
author, his psychotherapist, in a letter to ms. wu he read to the court
, and to the court during his
allocution.
he continues to co-parent his 3 children with
ms. wu pursuant to arrangements they have made.
iii.
victim impact
ms. wu provided an articulate and thorough
victim impact statement that illustrated the impact of mr. herrington’s
violence in the context of coercion and control that dominated not only the day
of the offence but permeated throughout her life
.
she addresses the emotional, psychological, physical, financial, familial, and
community impact of mr. herrington’s behaviour.
in particular, mr. herrington’s condescending,
sharp, and aggressive tone of that day seems to have been the norm, as was his
belittling criticism. this led her to live in a state of chronic fear and
self-doubt.  his controlling behaviour, intimidating physical presence and unpredictability
has caused her to remain triggered and unsure as to how he will respond to the
smallest things when interacting with her and the children.
she stated his anger, verbal aggression, and
control, created an unsafe emotional environment for her, and her children with
long-term psychological effects. she was clear that she believes mr. herrington
does not understand the magnitude of the impact of the abuse he inflicted on
her and she still has safety concerns for herself and the children.
her fears are more attenuated when she spoke to
the psr author stating that she does not have any fear for her and the
children’s safety, but rather “emotional fear is still in play” for herself
given the extent of verbal abuse and threatening behaviour that she endured.
iv.
position of the parties
the crown recommends a 2 month conditional
sentence order, a probation order with terms to protect the victim, a dna
order, and a weapons prohibition to reflect the denunciation and deterrence
required for the context and impact of this offence.
the defence emphasizes the counselling mr.
hetherington has taken, and the impact a conviction would have on his ability
to participate in his children’s swimming competitions to submit that a
conditional discharge and probation is more appropriate. the ancillary orders
were not disputed.
v.
legal principles
sections 718 to 718.2 provide the sentencing judge with guidance.
every sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
the sanction that the court imposes should have one or more of
the following objectives:
to denounce unlawful conduct
to deter the offender and other
persons from committing offences
to separate offenders from
society, where necessary
to assist in rehabilitating
offenders
to provide reparations for harm
done to victims or to the community
to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims
and to the community
the principles of restraint and parity also apply.
vi.
analysis
i must take aggravating and mitigating factors
into account.
the numerous aggravating factors include:
i.
the assault was perpetrated on an intimate
partner which is a statutorily aggravating.
ii.
the victim was in a position of vulnerability at
the time of the assault. the van she was driving was the family van, the
destination was for a family event, she needed the van keys and the identity in
her purse to enable her to drive the van literally and responsibly.
iii.
the assault was committed in the context of
coercive control. mr. herrington took the keys from the van she was driving
thereby limiting and controlling her freedom and ability to leave with the
children. his taking her purse and her essential, private, and personal
belongings including her wallet and identification was a demonstration of this
coercive control.
iv.
the assault occurred in the family home where
the victim is entitled to expect safety and sanctity rather than violence and
trauma.
v.
the assault occurred in the context of a dispute
that was loud enough, disturbing enough and threatening enough that the
neighbour believed ms. wu was in danger and required intervention.
vi.
the context of the assault was all about power
and control as mr. herrington took both the keys to the van ms. wu was driving
and her purse.
vii.
the two children were subject to mr.
herrington’s rage just prior to the assault and had to be protected from his
rage just after. the two children were in the van during mr. herrington’s
yelling and berating ms. wu for some time prior to the assault. they had to be left
alone in the van for their own safety, while ms. wu went into the home to try
to get the car keys back. although there is no victim impact statement from
them, the events as described by ms. wu during her testimony, then the
neighbour who had to keep mr. herrington from the children before the police arrived
lead to the conclusion they were impacted by the offence.
viii.
the assault had a significant impact on the
victim. ms. wu’s victim impact statement was compelling in its articulation of
the pervasive, wide-ranging, long lasting, and insidious physical, emotional,
and psychological harm intimate partner violence inflicts on the victim, the
children, the family, and the community by using the specifics of her
experience.  to be clear, it is the impact of mr. herrington’s assault on ms.
wu, and the assault alone, that is considered aggravating in this case.
although not an aggravating factor, it is a concerning
consideration that mr. herrington’s behaviour is long-standing. he participated
in the partner abuse response (par) program in 2018
.
in that report, mr. herrington appeared amenable
to accepting responsibility “for the abusive/violent behaviours he exhibited
toward his wife”. he was able to discuss his behaviours at the time, including admitting
to picking ms. wu up with his arms “around her neck” and throwing her on the
couch. he wanted to make changes and advised he was seeing a therapist one on
one back then to achieve those changes. neither the par program nor his
personal counselling in 2018 were effective enough to prevent mr. herrington’s
violence in 2023.
the numerous mitigating factors include:
i.
mr. herrington has no criminal record, and is a first-time
offender.
ii.
he has a strong employment history, supportive
friends, and volunteers for tsc. he has a pro-social history.
iii.
he is committed to rehabilitation as
demonstrated by his counselling sessions with a psychotherapist both since his
arrest, and in 2018.
iv.
he demonstrated remorse in his letter of apology
to ms. wu and during his allocution to the court.
“the determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation.  it
involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision”
stated the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
lacasse
.
this is a challenging task in every case, including this one.
domestic violence, now known as intimate partner
violence, has been a plague in our society for a very long time. it is a grave
social problem in canadian society. as justice wilson stated for the majority
in the supreme court of canada decision of
regina v. lavalle
(1990),
1990 canlii 95 (scc)
, 55
c.c.c. (3d) 97 (s.c.c.) at p. 112:
“the gravity, indeed, the tragedy of
domestic violence can hardly be overstated.  greater media attention to this
phenomenon in recent years has revealed both its prevalence and its horrific
impact on women from all walks of life”
the ontario court of appeal addressed the
prevalence of domestic violence in
r. v. inwood
(1989),
1989 canlii 263 (on ca)
, 48 c.c.c. (3d)
173 (ont. c.a.) and again in
r. v. bates
(2000),
2000 canlii 5759 (on ca)
, 146 c.c.c. (3d) 321
(ont. c.a.), particularly emphasizing the principles of denunciation and deterrence
in numerous cases since.
the
criminal code
recognizes the
vulnerability of women and girls, the majority of whom are the victims of intimate
partner violence, and specifically identifies their vulnerability in
ss. 718.2
and 718.2.1. the issues of intimate partner violence are particular
considerations in interim release orders, weapons prohibition orders, and most
recently, as of april 8, 2025, via the new s. 810.03, a specific “domestic
violence” peace bond.
the horror of intimate partner violence was once
again recently documented in the nova scotia mass casualty inquiry report
(march 2023).
in support of her position for a conditional
sentence order to reflect the principles applicable in this case, the crown relied
on:
r. v. boyle
,
2022 oncj 402
,
r. v. chirimar
,
2007 oncj 385
,
r.
v. dunlop
,
2014 oncj 44
and
r. v. mputu
, scj court file #
24-10000008, a summary conviction oral decision by justice dunphy. in each case,
the offender was sentenced to either a jail term or a conditional sentence.
•
mr. boyle was found guilty of numerous offences,
caused more injuries, but was only 21, and had significant hardships. he was sentenced
to 60 days jail intermittent.
•
mr. chirimar inflicted bruises and abrasions all
over his wife’s body, the assaults perpetrated in front of their child and the
call of a neighbour ended the abuse that had been going on for months. he pled
guilty to assault causing bodily harm, he was only 24, with no criminal record,
went to 20 individual counselling sessions and additional group counselling. he
expressed remorse and a conviction would negatively affect his status in
canada. he was sentenced to 6 months in jail.
•
mr. dunlop struck his intimate partner with a
cordless telephone, caused distress requiring medical attention and was
intoxicated at the time. he pled guilty and had a criminal record at the time.
he had a difficult life, frail health, had community support and had completed
300 hours of volunteer work.  he was sentenced to 4 months in jail.
•
mr. mputu assaulted his pregnant wife in view of
their 9-year-old daughter. the dispute was about a spoon and occurred in the
kitchen. he had no criminal record, showed remorse after trial and a conviction
would affect his employment.
in each case, the jurist reviewed the seriousness
of assaults perpetrated within the intimate partner relationship and the
paramount consideration for denunciation and deterrence which the crown relies
on in this case.
however, mr. herrington emphasizes the
rehabilitation efforts he made, and the possible negative effect that a
conviction may have on his ability to participate as an official and a volunteer
in two of his children’s competitive swimming careers, to support a conditional
discharge in this case.
i reviewed the material filed and find that
though a criminal record may curtail mr. herrington’s volunteering in some way,
it would not be an impediment to his children’s swimming participation, nor
their swimming success.
it is always in the best interest of an offender
to be conditionally discharged. it is the second prong of the test this court
must consider pursuant to s. 730 (1).  the issue is whether a conditional
discharge is not “contrary to the public interest”.
i find it would be contrary to the public
interest to discharge mr. herrington for having assaulted ms. wu. he chased her
around the kitchen island in her own home, swung at her with a closed fist, tried
to kick her, and then lunged and grabbed her without letting go. this after
having taken her keys and her purse while the children were in the car after an
afternoon of criticizing and yelling at her in an intimidating and belittling
fashion.  their size and height difference exacerbated his assault. he was
intentional and well aware of the purpose and effect of his conduct, his tactics,
his pattern of coercive control and his violence that afternoon.
counsel submitted that saddling mr. herrington
with a criminal record will not benefit society. indeed, the burden and stigma
of a criminal conviction does not benefit society. however, a criminal
conviction may be what is required to reflect society’s denunciation of the
offence an offender has committed. that is the case here. a conditional
discharge would be contrary to the public interest and would not adequately
reflect the principles required.
the crown’s recommendation of a conditional
sentence as a reflection of the denunciation and deterrence required is a
reasonable one, particularly given that mr. herrington’s conduct is
long-standing, and his previous counselling attempts to deal with it before
this assault failed.
however, i find that a conviction, in this case,
is sufficient to reflect the required principles of deterrence and denunciation
while adhering to the principle of restraint for a first-time criminal
offender.
vii.
sentence
mr. herrington, i sentence you to a suspended
sentence and a 3-year probation with terms.
i will also order:
(1)
a dna sample be taken today.
(2)
a weapons prohibition for 5 years.
(3)
the victim fine surcharge is to be paid within
90 days.
released:  september 2, 2025
signed:
justice c. faria
r. v. herrington
,
2025 oncj 195
.
exhibit 1: pre-sentence report, may 1, 2025.
exhibit 8: toronto swim club (tsc) overview, exhibit 9: tsc participation
policy; exhibit 10: herrington family points tally; exhibit 11: tsc fees policy;
exhibit 12: proof of enrollment; exhibit 13: volunteer job description: club
officials chair; exhibit 14: official certification; exhibit 15: dec log for
joseph herrington; exhibit 16: future swimming events; exhibit 18: photos.
exhibit 2: joy savage letter, april 24, 2025.
exhibit 7: noah casey counselling letter, november 22, 2024.
exhibit 3: noah casey counselling letter, may 1, 2025.
exhibit 2: joseph herrington apology letter.
exhibit 17: calendar notes.
exhibit 5: victim impact statement, janice wu, april 21, 2025.
exhibit 6: par report, october 23, 2018.
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58
.
r. v. pitkeathyly
(1994),
1994 canlii 222 (on ca)
, 29 c.r. (4
th
) 182 (ont. c.a.),
r.
v. boucher
(2004)
2004 canlii 17719 (on ca)
, 186 c.c.c. (3d) 479 (ont. c. a.),
r. v. campbell
, (2003)
2003 canlii 48403 (on ca)
, 170, o.a.c. 282 (c.a.) and
r. v. denkers
(1994)
1994 canlii 2660 (on ca)
, 69 o.a.c. 391 (c.a.).
none of the material filed referred specifically to whether mr. herrington is
required to have no criminal record to remain a level iii certified officiator,
nor whether he needs to pass a vulnerable person’s check to observe his
children at their meets and practices. however, i am prepared to note that it
likely may. in any case, his children’s participation, travel and success in
not dependent on mr. herrington’s participation in their activities.