warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notices be
attached to the file:
this is a case under the
youth criminal
justice act
and is subject to subsections 110(1) and 111(1) and section 129
of the act.  these provisions read as follows:
110.  identity
of offender not to be published
—
(1)  subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a
young person, or any other information related to a young person, if it would
identify the young person as a young person dealt with under this act.
.   .   .
111.  identity
of victim or witness not to be published
—
(1)  subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a child
or young person, or any other information related to a child or a young person,
if it would identify the child or young person as having been a victim of, or
as having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed or
alleged to have been committed by a young person.
.   .   .
129.  no
subsequent disclosure
—
no person who is given access to a record or to whom information is
disclosed under this act shall disclose that information to any person unless
the disclosure is authorized under this act.
subsection 138(1)
of the
youth criminal justice act
,
which deals with the conse­quences of
failure to comply with these provisions, states as follows:
138.  offences
—
every person who contravenes
subsection 110(1) (identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity
of victim or witness not to be published)  . . .  or
section 129 (no subsequent disclosure)  . . .
(
a
)   is
guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years; or
(
b
)   is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario  court  of  justice
youth justice court
citation:
r. v. r.s.v.,
2025 oncj
495
date:  2025·09·25
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
r.
s. v.
sentencing
heard and
delivered: september 25, 2025
ms. thariza ganeshamoorthy, ms. lilah vassilenko.........................   counsel for the
crown
mr.  saad amjad................................................................................
counsel for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
the complainant was followed by a group of
six young men and one young woman from the scarborough town centre onto a bus
headed to vaughan. the group split up into two, one behind and one in front of the
complainant. both groups watched him and exchanged signals pointing as he got
up to leave at one of the last stops.
all the young men were fully masked. they
exited and attacked the complainant, robbing him of an expensive coat at
knifepoint. rsv and his associates kept beating the victim even after the coat
was surrendered. the complainant was taken to hospital afterwards. he suffered
a concussion which kept him out of school for 4 or 5 months. he lost his
academic year. he just recently returned to school.
mr. rsv was convicted at trial of robbery
contrary to s 343 of the
criminal code
.
aggravating circumstances
there are several features that aggravate
sentence:
•
the robbery was a planned attack, coordinated
with others,
•
the use of the knife during the robbery,
although the complainant was not stabbed or cut and rsv did not use the knife,
•
the significant impact of the offence on the
victim’s health and financial circumstances,
•
the impact of a violent robbery on the
community, particularly where the victim was stalked while on public
transportation.
mitigating circumstances
the pre-sentence report and the young
person’s letter to the victim at the time of sentence show a number of
mitigating factors:
•
rsv has no record,
•
he has the support of his family and positive
social engagement,
•
he attends school and works part-time,
•
he has expressed remorse and now has insight
into his offence.
rsv’s comment in the pre-sentence report
that he tried to convince his friends to leave at the time finds no support in
the trial evidence including the bus video and the video of the attack. his
letter to the victim marked as exhibit 2 on sentence shows a much better
appreciation of the circumstances.
the impact of violence with knives was directly
brought home to rsv three months after this robbery. he was stabbed four times
in an unrelated incident. his recovery was difficult physically and mentally.
rsv was cooperative with the pre-sentence
interview. he is open to participating in rehabilitative programs.
the submissions of counsel
the crown and defence jointly submit that a
sentence of 18 months probation is appropriate in the circumstances with
ancillary firearms prohibition and dna orders.
the sentence
the purpose of sentencing under the
youth criminal justice act
sc 2002 c 1
(ycja) is to hold a young person accountable for an offence through the
imposition of just sanctions that have meaningful consequences for the young
person and promote his rehabilitation thereby contributing to the long-term
protection of the public. the sentencing principles in s 38(2) and (3) of the
ycja require a review of several factors including the proportionality of the
sentence having regard to the seriousness of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the young person, and consideration of the harm done to the
victim.
section 38(2)
(d) requires all available sanctions other than custody be
considered and s 38(2)(e)(i) directs that the least restrictive sentence
compatible with the purpose of sentencing be imposed.
the circumstances of this planned, violent
robbery and its effect on the victim and the community would typically require
consideration of the various sanctions beyond probation as set out in section
42(2). a sentence of probation would include community service as a means of accomplishing
the important sentencing objectives set out in the
ycja
. here the defence and
crown jointly submit a period of probation with no provision for community
service. the only positive act required by the proposed order is “counselling”
undefined.
considering all of the circumstances, while
i acknowledge that other sanctions and probation terms would better meet the
specific concerns in this case and the purpose and principles of sentence, the
jointly submitted sentence is not unfit. accordingly, mr. rsv will be placed on
probation for 18 months with the following conditions:
•
report to probation by phone or in-person within
48 hours and thereafter as required.
•
reside at address approved of by probation
•
take any counselling as required
•
attend school or maintain employment
•
no contact with the co-accuseds and victim as
named by the crown
•
not to be within 100m of any known place of
residence, employment or education of the co-accuseds or the victim.
•
not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
.
there is a mandatory order under s 51(1) of
the
ycja
prohibiting the young person from possessing any firearm, cross-bow,
prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition or explosive substance for 2 years.
i’ve considered rsv’s current circumstances
as a young person along with the circumstances of the violent robbery. i find
it necessary in the public interest to order that you provide a sample of your
dna for registration on the national databank.
delivered: september 25, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel