ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. martin
, 2025 oncj 160
date:
march 21, 2025
court
file no.:  0211-998-24-21000816-01
0211-998-24-21000264-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
luke adam
martin
before
justice robert s. gee
heard
on march 10 and 12, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 21, 2021
v. fedorchuk....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
e. angevine.............................................................
counsel for the accused luke martin
gee j.:
introduction
on january 24, 2024, police searched a 2012 ford
escape parked at 33 park avenue east, brantford, which was linked to the
accused, luke martin.
inside the trunk of the vehicle, officers
discovered a blue walmart shopping bag containing 442.1 grams of methamphetamine
and 1,526.9 grams of fentanyl.
as a result of this discovery, mr. martin is
facing two charges of possession for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s.
5(2) of the controlled drugs and substances act.
mr. martin elected to have his trial in the
ontario court of justice and evidence was heard over two days, on march 10 and
12, 2025. issues such as the nature of the substances seized, continuity of the
substances, and that whoever possessed those substances did so for the purposes
of trafficking were all conceded by the defence. mr. martin’s defence to the
charges was that he had no knowledge of the substances in the ford escape. he
argued the drugs were possessed by his former co-accused, brandon pfeiffer.
the following reasons will explain why i find
the crown has proven that the accused was in possession of the methamphetamine
and fentanyl located in the ford escape and as such, why findings of guilt will
be made.
facts
found in the ford escape in addition to the
drugs were a number of firearms. mr. martin and mr. pfeiffer were jointly charged
with the possession of the firearms, as well as a stolen ford f150 and the
escape which was also alleged to have been stolen. on february 26, 2025, which
was to be the start of their joint trial, mr. pfeiffer plead guilty to the
possession of the firearms, the theft of the f150, and a number of other
charges including dangerous operation and flight from police. mr. martin alone,
was charged in relation to the drugs.
at the outset of trial on march 10, 2025, mr. martin,
plead guilty to the theft of the f150, possession of break in instruments, and
breach probation. sentencing on those charges was delayed until the completion
of his trial on the drug charges. the facts surrounding the theft of the ford
escape and the f150 and the police discovery of the drugs are not much in dispute,
given the pleas on the theft and firearm related charges. the only issue to
decide in the trial is if the crown can prove that mr. martin possessed the
drugs.
the following paragraphs setting out the facts
come from agreed statements of facts filed by the parties and in court
testimony of witnesses. the crown called three witnesses, michael mccrory, the
owner of the ford escape, and two brantford police officers involved in the
arrest of mr. martin, andre gudgeon, and richard ciotti. the only witness for
the defence was mr. pfeiffer. mr. martin chose not to testify, though the
statement he gave to police on his arrest was admitted at trial on consent.
on wednesday, january 24, 2024, susan white was
inside of her home on avedisian street, in brantford, when she looked out her
window and noticed a dark coloured ford suv pull up in front of their home. she
turned away for a few seconds to put something in the garbage and when she
looked back, she observed her husband’s 2020 ford f150 being driven out of
their driveway and the same dark coloured ford suv following it down the street.
ms. white did not see the driver of the ford suv nor their f150. at this point,
it was 10:23 a.m.
richard white received a text message from his
wife at approximately 10:25 a.m. asking him to call her as their f150 had just
pulled out of their driveway. mr. white began to immediately track his f150 on
the vehicle manufacturer application on his phone.
at approximately 10:27 a.m., he called police to
report the theft of his motor vehicle. he remained on the phone with 911
providing information as he received updated gps locations from the app. he
provided the 911 operator with tracking information as it made its way through
the city of brantford. the last location that mr. white received from the app
was 34 park avenue east before it stopped updating.
at approximately 10:32 a.m., constable milmine of
the brantford police observed the ford f150 travelling eastbound on south
street and crossing murray street onto park ave east. he also observed there to
be a black motor vehicle following directly behind the ford f150. officer
milmine was able to locate the ford f150 approximately one minute later at 33
park avenue east, in the sonoco canada corporation parking lot. at this time, officer
milmine observed a black 2012 ford escape idling at the rear of the parking
lot, nosed in and directly beside the ford f150, which was also nosed in and
idling. officer milmine used his marked police cruiser to block both vehicles
as there was a barrier blocking them from going forward.
upon blocking in both vehicles, officer milmine
observed a male, later identified as mr. martin wearing black latex gloves
standing between both vehicles next to the driver’s side door of the ford f150
and outside the passenger side door of the ford escape.
upon approach, the ford f150 fled striking officer
milmine. it then left the parking lot at a high rate of speed. this occurred
just as officer gudgeon was arriving. as the f150 made its escape, it clipped
officer gudgeon’s cruiser. officer gudgeon assisted officer milmine, who was
not seriously injured when struck by the f150, in apprehending mr. martin who was
arrested after a brief struggle.
the following items were found in the ford
escape. on the front passenger seat was a blue bud light bag containing various
tools capable for being used to break and enter motor vehicles and a black
purse containing several key fobs for various motor vehicles.
inside a beige duffel bag on the rear, driver’s
side seat, police located a winchester 1300 defender model 12 gauge pump action
shotgun missing the stock, and a winchester, model sxp 12 gauge pump action
shotgun. this firearm had 5 shotgun shells in the magazine and the police took
steps to make it safe. also found was a henry repeating arms, golden boy model
.22, a loaded ammunition belt containing 39, 12 gauge shotgun shells, and a
black pistol style magazine, which is a prohibited device as defined in
s. 84
of the
criminal code
.
located in a backpack in the rear of the ford
escape was a conductive energy weapon, also a prohibited device as defined in
s. 84
of the
criminal code
.
in the trunk of the escape, inside a blue
walmart shopping bag, police located a large quantity of various suspected
illegal substances. these later were weighed and analyzed to be 442.1 grams of
methamphetamine and 1,526.9 grams of fentanyl.
the estimated street value of 442.1 grams of the
methamphetamine in the city of brantford in 2024 was between $44,210.00 and
$88,420.00 if sold by point which is 0.1 gram, $53,052.00 if sold by the gram,
and $10,610.00 if sold by the kilogram.
the estimated street value of the fentanyl in
the city of brantford in 2024 was $305,380.00 if sold by point, $351,187.00 if
sold by the gram, and $22,903.00 if sold by the kilogram. police also seized
multiple empty ziplock bags and two digital weigh scales.
as mentioned earlier, mr. pfeiffer was called to
testify by the defence. he stated that he and mr. martin had been friends for a
long time. at the time, mr. pfeiffer had a significant criminal record
including two separate convictions for drug trafficking and firearm offences that
netted him penitentiary sentences each time. in addition to that, while he was
committing these offences in brantford in january 2024, he was facing further
drug trafficking charges from kitchener, ontario.
in fact, he had entered guilty pleas in
kitchener to those charges and had negotiated a release on bail for 30 days so
he could put his affairs in order before starting what would then be his third penitentiary
sentence. however, he stated he panicked and failed to appear for his
sentencing because he did not have his affairs in order yet and had not put
together enough money for his family to survive on while he was in jail. as
such, by january 24, 2024, when these incidents took place, there would have
been a warrant out for his arrest.
in his testimony, he stated this day he was
actively trying to do both, put his affairs in order, and attempting to get
money for his family. he was putting his affairs in order by starting the
process of moving out of his residence on brock street in brantford, across
from mr. mccrory where he had been renting for the past year and a half. to
this end he stated mr. mccrory let him borrow his ford escape. he had also
arranged to borrow an f150 from a friend he had met at the methadone clinic
who’s name he couldn't recall. the plan was he would borrow this f150, return
to his residence on brock street, load it and presumably the escape, with his
belongings and move them to his girlfriend’s place in hamilton for her to keep
while he was in jail.
in order to provide his family with a financial
nest egg to rely on while he was jailed, his plan was to return to selling
drugs.
mr. pfeiffer claimed that the drugs and firearms
found in the ford escape belonged solely to him and he never told mr. martin
about them, because he knew mr. martin had a substance abuse problem and feared
he might steal or use them. mr. martin’s involvement this day was, according to
mr. pfeiffer, only to help him move.
the plans for the day started to fall apart when
they arrived at the house of the friend to borrow the f150 and it would not
start. as they were leaving, mr. pfeiffer said he saw mr. white’s f150 nearby
and since he knew how to steal an f150, they stopped, mr. pfeiffer jumped out
of the escape, and he stole mr. white’s f150. he was driving it back toward his
residence, followed by mr. martin in the escape in an attempt to salvage their
plan to move that day, when that plan unravelled upon the arrival of the
police. when the police showed up, he again panicked and fled, leaving behind
mr. martin and the escape full his guns and drugs.
although he did not testify, as mentioned
earlier, mr. martin’s videotaped statement to the police was admitted on
consent. in it he stated the ford escape was borrowed from a guy across the
street. he said he was asked to go in the escape to pick up another truck. when
asked who he was with, at times he refused to say and at others he said he
barely knew them or didn’t know. he also denied having any knowledge of the
guns or drugs in the escape. he was asked to go pick up a truck and that was
the extent of his involvement, he was unaware of any, guns or drugs.
the law
the evidence the crown relies on to support the
inference mr. martin had knowledge and control of the drugs in the ford escape
is circumstantial. in such a case, in order to make a finding of guilt, i must
be satisfied that the accused's guilt is the only reasonable conclusion
available on the totality of the evidence. if there are reasonable inferences
other than guilt, the crown's evidence does not meet the standard of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt. see: r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33
, at paragraphs
35
and 55
.
in this case, the inference available other than
guilt argued by the defence is that mr. martin had no knowledge of the drugs in
the ford escape. the evidence supportive of that comes from mr. pfeiffer’s
testimony and mr. martin’s denials in his police interview. my task is to
determine if this is a reasonable inference. if it is, mr. martin is entitled
to an acquittal. if it is not though, that does not necessarily lead to a
conviction, i must still be satisfied the on the totality of the evidence, mr. martin’s
guilt is the only reasonable inference available.
analysis
to determine if mr. martin’s argument that he
lacked knowledge of the drugs is a reasonable inference, i must determine if i
believe or, if i am left in a doubt by the evidence of mr. pfeiffer or the
denials of mr. martin. i have concluded i am not.
dealing first with the evidence of mr. pfeiffer,
his narrative is entirely implausible, in many respects defies common sense and
is so riddled with inconsistencies, that it is incapable of any level of belief.
for instance, mr. pfeiffer who is now in his
30’s, started by saying that he and mr. martin have known each other for years,
at least since high school. he first testified, even though they’ve known each
other that long, mr. martin was unaware he was a drug dealer, notwithstanding that
he had done two stints in the penitentiary for dealing drugs, and despite the
fact he asked mr. martin to help him move since he was about to start a third. eventually,
under cross-examination, he admitted this assertion was untrue and mr. martin
was aware of his drug dealing history. this could be described as an implausibility,
that in these circumstances mr. martin would not know of mr. pfeiffer’s drug
dealing past, or it could be described as an inconsistency since he later
admitted he was aware, or it could perhaps most properly be characterized as an
attempt to deceive or mislead the court.
as well, the explanation for what he and mr.
martin were doing that day defies logic. first, he says they borrowed the ford
escape from mr. mccrory. this is contradicted by mr. mccrory who later that day
reported it stolen. both mr. pfeiffer and mr. martin allege it was borrowed and
not stolen and point to the fact the keys to the escape were with it when found
by police. whether it was stolen or not is not an issue i need to decide since
it is not a charge mr. martin is on trial for. however, there are some
inconsistencies between those involved about the escape. mr. mccrory stated he
left the keys on a shelf inside the door to his residence. mr. pfeiffer says
the keys were in the centre console while mr. martin in his statement, says he
found the keys above the visor.
next, mr. pfeiffer stated they left his brock
street residence in the escape to go pick up the f150 he had arranged to
borrow. it was only when they arrived to pick it up and found it would not
start that the decision was made to steal mr. white’s f150. one of the items
though located in the escape was a bag of tools capable for being used to break
into vehicles. mr. martin as noted has entered a guilty plea to this charge.
one must ask, if there was never an intention to steal a vehicle, why would it
be necessary to take along your bag of tools needed to break into and steal
vehicles.
the next aspect of the narrative that completely
defies logic given the purpose for which mr. pfeiffer said they were out that
day, is why, if he’s telling the truth, would he bring his drugs and guns along
with him to pick up a truck he was borrowing and heading straight back to his
house with. this was a very large quantity of drugs and a large stash of
firearms. mr. pfeiffer even acknowledged as a drug dealer, anytime you’re out
like this driving around with your drugs and guns, you’re exposing yourself to
detection by the police. detection can come in many ways, it doesn’t have to be
active drug dealing, or other crime being committed, detection can result from
things as simple as a traffic stop. he admitted it would be much safer, if not
actively dealing, to leave your drugs and guns at your residence safely
secured. according to him though, this is not what he did. he said he put them
in the escape when they left to retrieve the f150. his only explanation was
that this was the day he was moving.
even that though, as pointed out by the crown in
cross-examination, didn’t make sense because other than the guns and drugs,
there were very few other items in the escape. there was plenty of room left in
the escape if the real intention was to load it for the move.
most tellingly though, were that he got two other
aspects of his narrative wrong when compared to the known facts, that he
wouldn't get wrong were he telling the truth. first, he said he put his beige
duffel bag that contained the firearms in the trunk with the drugs. this was
not though, where the duffel bag with the guns was located. as noted earlier, it
was on the driver’s side back seat, not in the trunk area.
the second aspect he got wrong was that he said
there were two ounces of fentanyl in the blue walmart bag. two ounces is about
57 grams. this testimony by him is wildly inaccurate. as noted earlier there
was in fact, 1,526.9 grams of fentanyl in the blue walmart bag. mr. pfeiffer
was off by just a point under 1,470 grams. it is inconceivable a drug dealer
would be this uninformed about the quantity of fentanyl he had in his
possession.
i find it is likely mr. pfeiffer was aware of
the presence of guns and drugs in the ford escape. his testimony though that it
was in the exclusive possession of him, unbeknownst to mr. martin, is wholly
unbelievable.
i have also determined mr. martin’s denial of
any knowledge of the presence of the drugs and guns in the escape is not
believable. it is clear from his interview he was reluctant to answer police
questions. he indicated his counsel before the interview, advised him to not
speak to the police. as the interview went on, he chose to answer some
questions and others he chose not to answer. he has an absolute right to do
this, choose to answer some questions and not others. it would be improper for
me to hold against him the fact he chose to remain silent on some of what was
asked of him. to do so would render the protection he is afforded by the
charter, illusory. however, that’s not what he did. he chose to answer some of
the questions. for instance, when asked the name of his friend that asked him to
go pick up the truck, instead of saying nothing or that he wasn’t answering, he
chose to say that he didn’t know these people well and that he didn’t know them
at all. when he does choose to answer, i'm entitled to assess the veracity of
what he says and, in this instance, it is clear his claim to not know who it
was is simply untrue.
also, at another point he said there were two to
three other people with them for this adventure and again, that is simply not
true. for these reasons alone, i would not believe his denials in his interview
to not know the drugs and guns were in the escape.
in his statement mr. martin admitted being the
driver of the escape. this gave him control of the escape and a measure of
control over its contents. another reason to not believe his claim of lack of
knowledge of the guns and drugs is that the items were not particularly well
hidden in the vehicle. officer gudgeon testified the beige duffel bag was not
closed and he was able to see the stock of one of the firearms simply by
looking through the window of the escape. obviously, mr. martin would have been
able to see the firearm equally as easily as officer gudgeon did.
the drugs too, even though they were in the
walmart bag, they were not particularly well concealed and the bag itself was
not closed. any quick look in the bag would have revealed to the viewer the
drugs inside.
in addition to all these reasons though, the
most compelling reason to disbelieve mr. martin’s claim to ignorance of the
drugs and guns, is simply the sheer size of them. the duffel bag was large,
open and there were several firearms inside, but it is the quantity of the
drugs that belie any notion mr. martin did not know of them.
as noted, the defence has suggested a reasonable
inference inconsistent with guilt is that the guns and drugs were placed there
by mr. pfeifer without the knowledge of mr. martin. for reasons already
explained, i have found this is not a reasonable inference on the facts. that
leaves only two other inferences, the guns and drugs were in the possession of
mr. martin, or were placed there by some other unknown person, without the
knowledge of mr. martin.
this unknown person theory though is also not
reasonable. there was no evidence that the duffel bag with the guns and the
walmart bag with the drugs was in the escape when they either borrowed or stole
it from mr. mccrory. even the defence conceded pointing the finger at mr.
mccrory was not reasonable.
although the time when they came into possession
of the escape wasn’t explicit, the evidence suggests there was not much time
between when mr. martin and mr. pfeiffer came into its possession, the theft of
mr. white’s f150, and the ultimate apprehension of mr martin by the police. the
window of time available for someone to put the bags of guns and drugs in the escape
without mr. martin’s knowledge is practically non-existent.
further to this, is the fact when mr. martin was
arrested, he was wearing black, latex gloves. even though it was january, latex
gloves are not worn for warmth. in this context, the reasons for wearing latex
gloves would be limited. it would be to avoid leaving fingerprints when
engaging in criminal activity or perhaps as a safety precaution when handling
large quantities of a deadly drug like fentanyl.
the most compelling reason to disbelieve mr.
martin’s denials though is the sheer quantity and in turn the value of the
drugs. the fentanyl was worth just over $350,000.00 and the methamphetamine was
worth slightly more that $88,000.00. that’s drugs worth a total of
approximately $438,000.00. it is more than a reasonable inference that such a
valuable quantity of drugs would not be entrusted to anyone who did not know
the nature of the contents of the bag they came in. see: r. v. bains,
2015 onca 677 (canlii)
,
o.j. no. 5191 paragraph
157
.
conclusion
in this case, for all the reasons stated above,
i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. martin’s guilt is the only
reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence. there is no
other reasonable inference, inconsistent with guilt based on the evidence or
lack of evidence here. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt mr. martin had knowledge
of the presence of the firearms, fentanyl and methamphetamine in the ford
escape and that he as well had control over these items. as such, findings of
guilt will be made on both charges of possession for the purpose of trafficking
he is facing.
released:  march 21, 2025
signed:
justice robert s. gee