ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. b.g.
, 2025 oncj 528
date:
october 8, 2025
court
file no.: barrie, #24-81301542
between:
his majesty the king
respondent
— and —
b.g.
applicant
before
justice c.a. brannagan
heard
on 19 september 2025
reasons
for ruling on stage 1
mills
(s. 278.3) application
approved
for publication:
s. 278.9(1)
(c) of the
criminal code
mr. e. ashurov…………………………………………………   counsel
for the applicant
ms. c mazgarean…………………………………………  counsel
for the complainants
ms. a. meiners………………………………………………………
counsel for the crown
c.a. brannagan
j.:
i.         overview
b.g. is charged with three counts of exposure to
persons under the age of 16, three counts of sexual assault, three counts of
assault, three counts of sexual interference, two counts of invitation to
sexual touching, and one count of sexual exploitation against the various complainants
(s.t., a.t., and u.t.) contrary to ss. 173(2), 271, 265, 151, 152, and 153(1),
respectively, of the
criminal code
.
b.g. is the father of the three complainants: s.t.
is 25, a.t. is 16, and u.t. is 14 years of age.
b.g. applies, under
s. 278.3
of the
criminal
code
, for an order for production of records in possession of simcoe
muskoka family connexions (“smfc”).
simcoe muskoka family connexions is a non-profit
multi-service agency operating in the district of muskoka and simcoe county. the
organization is mandated, as a children’s aid society, under the
child,
youth and family services act, 2017
, s.o. 2017, c. 14, sched. 1 (“
cyfsa
”)
to provide child protection services to children under the age of 18 years:
cyfsa
, s. 35.
there are four sets of records in the possession
of smfc that are at issue in the present case, identified by the years of the agency’s
involvement with b.g.’s family: 2016, 2018, 2022, and 2024.
the stage 1 hearing was held in this matter, pursuant
to s. 278.4(1), on september 19, 2025. the court heard full submissions from
counsel for the applicant, the complainants, and the crown, concerning the
question of whether the smfc records at issue should be produced to this court
for inspection.
i was told that the 2024 records speak directly
to smfc’s involvement regarding the subject-matter of the charges faced by the
applicant. counsel for the complainants conceded that i had authority, under s.
278.5, to order production of these records.
the crown joined the complainants in this
submission.
the court then asked the applicant whether he
was satisfied with the concession made by the complainants and the crown, or
whether he still wished to seek production of the 2016, 2018, and 2022 records.
the applicant confirmed that he wished to proceed.
this is my ruling in relation to the balance of the
records sought by the applicant, at stage 1 of this application.
ii.         the applicant’s
application
i.
the records sought
the applicant seeks production of records in
possession of smfc from 2016, 2018, and 2022. b.g. claims that “[e]vidence
contained in smfc records may include any statements of the complainants
pertaining to the applicant’s alleged misconduct or absence thereof which can
directly impact on their credibility and reliability at trial”: applicant’s application
record,
grounds
, at para. 6.
the basis for this application revolves around
the dates of b.g.’s alleged sexual offending against his children and the timing
of smfc’s interventions with the family.
b.g.’s daughter, s.t., was the original
complainant in this matter. she disclosed her father’s alleged sexual abuse – towards
her brothers, between 2022 and 2024 – to smfc in october of 2024. smfc, in
turn, alerted the police to these allegations, which then led to the applicant
being criminally charged. these are the records that the complainants concede may
be produced to the court for review at stage 1.
during this interaction with smfc, s.t. did not
make any allegations against her father in relation to the sexual abuse said to
have been perpetrated against her; those allegations only arose later, once the
police became involved.
as stated, smfc was involved with b.g.’s family
on four occasions – during the years of 2016, 2018, 2022, and 2024.
the applicant claims that, because the smfc
records post-date the years in which s.t. claims that she was sexually abused
by her father (2014-2015), and that the 2022 and 2024 records are concurrent
with the period that b.g. allegedly abused a.t. and u.t., the smfc records are
“likely relevant”.
the applicant further claims that production of
these records is “necessary in the interests of justice” for the applicant to
make full answer and defence.
as pleaded by the applicant, the smfc records:
may be logically probative of a material issue in the present case as
they could reveal information about the circumstances and relationships
existing between the members of the family of which the applicant is a parent.
specifically, the records may contain information of family environment (which
s.t. in her statement described as violent), the information of the applicant’s
disposition (which s.t. described as abusive) and any interviews with the
children regarding presence or absence of any sexual misconduct by the
applicant towards them: applicant’s factum, at para. 34.
ii.
evidentiary or informational foundation
for the application
the applicant has filed an affidavit in support
of his application, being that of irina ashurov, a legal assistant at the law
office of the applicant’s counsel (“the affidavit”). the information within the
affidavit is primarily derived from crown disclosure.
the affidavit indicates that the south simcoe
police service (“ssps”) was first contacted by krista bartlett of smfc on
october 27, 2024. ms. bartlett advised ssps that s.t. had reported sexual abuse
in her home, with b.g. being the offender.
on october 29, 2024, ssps conducted video
statements with the two boys, a.t. and u.t.
on october 30, 2024, ssps conducted a video
statement with s.t. at that time, she told police that she grew up in a violent
environment and that the applicant was abusive towards her mother and the three
complainants. it was during this video statement that s.t. disclosed to ssps
that she had been sexually abused by her father during the summer of 2014 and
the winter of 2015.
paragraph 21 of the affidavit describes the three
other sets of records in issue, based on disclosure received, as follows:
(1)
2016 – there was an allegation that b.g. had
assaulted the complainants’ mother;
(2)
2018 – there was a call received by smfc, but
nothing could be verified as there was not enough information provided; and,
(3)
2022 – u.t. was taken to the hospital after
falling in a forested area in bradford and hitting his head.
attached to the affidavit as exhibit ‘a’ is a
redacted copy of an agency form called the “general communication intake &
non-criminal code domestics jotform template”. the jotform indicates that smfc
had decided to initiate a child protection investigation because of s.t.’s
complaint against her father in october of 2024.
neither the affidavit, nor the smfc jotform, suggest
that the agency was involved with b.g.’s family in 2016, 2018, or 2022 for reasons
of alleged sexual abuse in the home.
during oral submissions, counsel for the applicant
conceded that there was nothing in any of the disclosure that was available to
him to indicate that s.t. (or any of the other complainants) had claimed that they
had reported any allegations of sexual misconduct to the smfc, other than during
the 2024 interaction with the agency.
iii.
the applicant’s argument in-brief
the applicant’s principal argument in favour of
production of the 2016, 2018, and 2022 records is that, given smfc’s
involvement with the family on the above-described occasions, these records are
likely to provide insight into the family dynamics and the environment in which
the applicant was said to have been acting during the times of these alleged
offences.
further, because smfc’s mandate is one of child welfare,
these records are likely relevant, and production is necessary in the interests
of justice to advancing b.g.’s ability to make a full answer and defence to the
allegations of sexual abuse in this case.
the applicant claims as a general proposition
that child welfare records are afforded, in law, less protection than are other
enumerated records. he submits that authority for this
position is found in
r. v. s.s.s
.,
2021 onca 552
.
he further submits that because b.g. is the
parent of the complainants, the latter’s privacy interests are additionally diminished
by virtue of the parent-child relationship. producing these records, he
submits, would result in only a mitigated kind of harm, if any, because b.g. is
the father of the complainants, and he would otherwise be entitled to
disclosure of these records in other circumstances. counsel did not direct the
court to any specific legal authority for this proposition.
iii.        positions of the responding
parties
i.
the complainants’ position
the complainants oppose the application, except
for the records relating to the october 2024 disclosure that directly led to
the charges before this court.
complainants’ counsel reminds the court of the
importance of taking a disciplined approach to the production of records in
sexual assault cases. counsel cites the supreme court of canada’s decision in
j.j.
:
“the criminal trial process can be invasive, humiliating, and degrading for
victims of sexual offences, in part because myths and stereotypes continue to
haunt the criminal justice system”:
r. v. j.j.
,
2022 scc 28
, at para.
1
.
the complainants’ counsel also cites
j.j.
,
at para.
45
, to emphasize that: “complainants have privacy interests in highly
sensitive information about themselves, the disclosure of which can impact on
their dignity […] dissemination of highly personal sensitive information can
result not just in discomfort or embarrassment, but in an affront to the
affected person’s dignity.”
in contrast to the applicant’s submission that child
welfare records attract a diminished privacy interest, the complainants
maintain that such records engage a high degree of privacy. counsel cites a
decision from the superior court of justice,
r. v. a.s.
,
2025 o.j. no.
171
, where that court observed: “cas records must be considered as implicating
the highest level of privacy, whether or not they contain counselling and
therapy records relating to the complainant”: at para. 39.
the complainants submit that the application
should be dismissed at stage 1. they claim that the applicant has failed to
provide a sufficient explanation as to the basis for seeking production, that
he has failed to adduce any evidentiary basis for their production, and
ultimately that the applicant is embarking upon a fishing expedition. the
applicant has failed to establish “likely relevance” in the disputed records.
the complainants further submit that it is not “necessary
in the interests of justice” to order production of the smfc records. there is
no basis to conclude that these records will provide any useful or added
information to the applicant. the complainants’ privacy interests in these
records remain high.
finally, in consideration of the claim that
production of these records to the applicant is necessary to making a full
answer and defence, the complainants submit that this right is not
automatically breached where he may be deprived of relevant information.
rather, b.g. would have to demonstrate actual prejudice to his ability to make
a full answer and defence but has failed to do so in this case.
ii.
the crown’s position
the crown joins the complainants in their
submissions. it submits that the applicant has failed to establish an
evidentiary foundation that could support any of the assertions contained
within s. 278.3(4).
the crown submits that the applicant has not
demonstrated that the records sought are “likely relevant” to an issue at
trial, or to the competency of a witness to testify.
the crown claims that the applicant can adduce
evidence about the family dynamics and environment during the dates
corresponding to the allegations by way of
viva voce
evidence at the
trial proper.
the crown further submits that the mere fact of
smfc having been involved with the family in 2016, 2018, and 2022 – regardless
of whether those records contain disclosure relating to sexual misconduct –
does not automatically render the records “likely relevant” to an issue at
trial, because the applicant has failed to adequately identify which specific
issue(s) the records may be relevant to.
in short, the crown submits that the applicant
has failed to demonstrate that there is any probative value in the records
sought, the applicant has failed to meet the onus of demonstrating that the
records are “likely relevant”, and that production of the records is not
“necessary in the interests of justice”.
iv
.
the legal framework
i.
the
mills
regime for production of
third-party records, ss. 278.1-278.91
what has become known as the
mills
regime
for production of third-party records was proclaimed into force on may 12, 1997,
through bill c-46. bill c-46 amended the
criminal code
to include
ss.
278.1
to
278.91
, which provisions deal with the production of records in sexual
offence proceedings.
for ease of reference, i have summarized the substantive
provisions of bill c-46 as they relate to stage 1:
•
278.1
– provides the definition of “record” for
the purposes of sections 278.2 to 278.92.
•
278.2(1) – (3)
– generally prohibits the production of
records relating to a complainant or a witness to an accused in proceedings
concerning enumerated sexual offences, except in accordance with ss. 278.3 to
278.91. subsections 278.2(2) and (3) address waiver and notice issues where
such records are in possession or control of the prosecution.
•
278.3(1) & (2)
– provide that an accused who seeks
production of a record referred to in s. 278.2(1) must make an application to the
trial judge.
•
278.3(3)
– requires that the application be made in
writing and set out:
(a)
the particulars identifying the record sought for production and the name of
the party who has possession or control of it; and
(b)
the grounds on which the accused relies to establish that the record is likely
relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify.
•
278.3(4)
– enumerates 11 “assertions by the accused
that are not sufficient on their own to establish that the record is likely
relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify”.
subsections 278.3(5) & (6) relate to service of the application.
•
278.4(1) – (3)
– consideration of a s. 278.3 application
is to be held
in camera
. the record-holder, the complainant or witness,
and any other person to whom the record relates may appear and make submissions
at the hearing. each of these parties who participates in the hearing has the
right to be represented by counsel.
•
278.5(1)
– the trial judge may order the
record-holder to produce the record to the court for its review if, after the
s. 278.4(1) hearing is held, the court is satisfied that:
o
(a)
the application was made in accordance with ss.
278.3(2) to (6);
o
(b)
the accused has established that the record is likely
relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify;
and;
o
(c)
the production of the record is necessary in the
interests of justice.
•
278.5(2)
– the trial judge must consider the
salutary and deleterious effects of production on the determination on the
accused’s right to make a full answer and defence and on the right to privacy,
personal security and equality of the complainant or witness to whom the record
relates. there are eight enumerated factors for the court’s consideration.
the constitutionality of the provisions brought
into law by bill c-46 was upheld in
r. v. mills
,
1999 canlii 637 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 668.
the court distinguished these provisions from the common law records production
regime in
r. v. o’connor
,
1995 canlii 51 (scc)
, 4 s.c.r. 411.
at paragraph 53, the
mills
court described
the framework established to govern the production of private records to an
accused person in sexual offence proceedings as follows:
like
o’connor
, parliament has set up a two-stage process: (1)
disclosure to the judge; and (2) production to the accused. at the first stage,
the accused must establish that the record sought is “likely relevant to an
issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify” and that “the
production of the record is necessary in the interests of justice” (s.
278.5(1)). bill c-46 diverges from
o’connor
by directing the trial judge
to consider the salutary and deleterious effects of production to the court on
the accused’s right to full answer and defence and the complainant’s or
witness’s right to privacy and equality. a series of factors is listed that the
trial judge is directed to take into account in deciding whether the document should
be produced to the court (s. 278.5(2)).
the
“likely relevant” threshold
the court explained that the reference to the “assertions”
that are “not sufficient on their own” on an application for production to
establish that a record is “likely relevant”, legislated under s. 278.3(4),
exist “to prevent speculative and unmeritorious requests for production”.
reliance on these assertions, on their own, “simply prevents reliance on bare
‘assertions’ of the listed matters, where there is no other evidence and they
stand ‘on their own’”:
mills
, at para.
118
.
the court was careful to clarify that the
purpose and wording of
s. 278.3
do not prevent a defendant from relying on the
assertions enumerated in s. 278.3(4) “where there is an evidentiary or
informational foundation to suggest that they may be related to likely
relevance”. to rely on any of these assertions, the accused must be able to
point to “case specific evidence or information”:
mills
, at para.
120
; see
also
r. v. k.c.
,
2021 onca 401
, dissenting reasons of jamal j.a. (as he
then was), at para. 31;
r. v. m.b.
,
2022 onca 873
, at para.
45
.
the “likely relevant” threshold, while
significant, is not overly onerous:
r. v. batte
,
2000 canlii 5751 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 2184
(c.a.), at para.
65
;
r. v. bradley
,
2015 onca 738
, at para.
81
.
it is, however, legally insufficient for the
applicant to only demonstrate that the record contains a statement referable to
a subject matter relevant to the complainant’s credibility: “the mere fact that
a witness has said something in the past about a subject matter on which the
witness may properly be cross-examined at trial does not give that prior
statement any relevance. it gains relevance only if it is admissible in its own
right or has some impeachment value”:
batte
, at para.
77
;
bradley
,
at para.
83
.
even where the record was made close in time to
the incident, that consideration “would be true for many third-party records
applications, and something more is required to cloak the records in likely
relevance”:
m.b.
, at para.
51
, citing to fairburn a.c.j.o. in
k.c.
,
at para.
108
.
since records sought in the s. 278.3 regime are
in the hands of a third party, a stranger to the litigation, they are not part
of the “case to meet”. the applicant must therefore establish a basis that
could enable a trial judge to conclude “that there is actually further material
in existence that may be useful to the applicant in making full answer and
defence, in the sense that the material is logically probative”:
bradley
,
at para.
79
.
because the records have been created by a third
party for a purpose unrelated to the investigation or prosecution of the offence,
the court must assume as its starting point that the records are unlikely to be
relevant; hence, the imposition of the burden on the applicant to demonstrate
the likely relevance of what is sought:
bradley
, at para.
80
.
the
“necessary in the interests of justice” consideration
section 278.5(1)(c) requires the accused at this
stage to demonstrate to the trial judge, in addition to meeting the “likely
relevance” threshold, that the production of the record is “necessary in the
interests of justice”.
the
mills
court held that s. 278.5(2) “gives
substance to the requirement that trial judges consider the broad range of
rights and interests affected before ordering disclosure to the court.” consideration
of the salutary and deleterious effects of production to the court must include
the accused’s right to make a full answer and defence, and the rights to
privacy and equality of the complainant or witness or any other person to whom
the record relates:
mills
, at para.
127
.
section 278.5(1) provides the trial judge great
latitude in the exercise of their discretion, when applied in a constitutional
manner. this would include production to an accused of all private records “that
may be constitutionally required”, the right to make a full answer and defence being
such a constitutional requirement:
mills
, at para.
130
.
to assist the trial judge in assessing the
“necessary in the interests of justice” component, the court held: “where the privacy
right in a record is strong and the record is of low probative value or relates
to a peripheral issue, the judge might decide that non-disclosure will not
prejudice the accused’s right to full answer and defence and dismiss the
application for production”:
mills
,
at para.
131
.
on the other hand, “[i]f the judge concludes
that it is necessary to examine the documents at issue in order to determine
whether they should be produced to enable the accused to make full answer and
defence, then production to the judge is ‘necessary in the interest of justice’”:
mills
, at para.
132
.
additionally, where the record is established to
be “likely relevant” and, after considering the various factors, the judge is
left uncertain about whether its production is necessary to make full answer
and defence, “then the judge should rule in favour of inspecting the document”
since, in borderline cases, “the interests of justice require nothing less”:
mills
,
at para.
132
.
ii.
the privacy interests in child protection
records
all parties in this case agree that the smfc
records in dispute are “records” pursuant to s. 278.1.
counsel for the applicant cites the court of
appeal for ontario’s decision of
s.s.s.
,
2021 onca 552
, for the
proposition that records from child protection agencies attract a lesser degree
of privacy than do other kinds of records enumerated in s. 278.1.
with respect, i do not read
s.s.s.
as
standing for that proposition. the factual matrix of
s.s.s.
– which is
distinguishable from the facts in b.g.’s case – is central to my departure with
counsel on this point.
in
s.s.s.
, the children’s aid society had
sent a letter to the appellant
after
he had been charged criminally. the
letter informed him that an investigation had been conducted into whether the
complainant needed protection, and that the file had been subsequently closed.
here is what the court of appeal said about that record:
…the record at issue here was the result of a targeted cas
investigation. if the complainant was interviewed, it was with respect to the
very incident that is the subject of the charge against the appellant.  […]
given that any statement by the complainant to the cas, if she made one, would
have related to the allegations in this case and would not have been of a therapeutic
nature, the privacy interest in the record is not as high as in counselling
records: at paras. 48 & 49.
in other words, the court was satisfied that the
privacy interest in
those specific
cas records was not as high as in
counselling records
because
the records were prepared in respect of the
very incident that was the subject of the charge against the appellant. those records
had potential impeachment value and were found to be logically probative on
that basis.
the 2024 smfc records in b.g.’s case are of an
analogous kind.
i do not read
s.s.s.
as establishing a
blanket rule that child welfare records are any less worthy of the protections
afforded under the s. 278.3 regime than any of the other records enumerated therein.
instead, in my view, the court made a contextual assessment of the records at
issue on the specific facts before it, and nothing more.
a more comprehensive statement of the law concerning
the privacy interests owing to child protection records is set out in the
dissenting reasons of jamal j.a., as he then was, in
k.c.
,
supra
.
in that case, his honour noted that parliament
had specifically listed “child welfare” records as a class of records that
presumptively attract a reasonable expectation of privacy, whether or not they
relate to counselling or therapy. he found that records in the possession of
child welfare authorities can be “multifaceted” and “often involve
documentation regarding counselling and therapy, but they need not do so to
warrant high privacy protection”:
k.c.
,
at para.
60
.
his honour further found at para. 62:
applications for production of child welfare records implicate not only
the privacy but also the equality of the affected children because those
children’s lives have been ‘heavily documented’ by child welfare authorities
[…] through no fault of their own, such children are at risk of being treated
with less dignity and as less worthy of respect and consideration than other
children whose lives have not been heavily documented by the state.
justice jamal rejected the appellant’s
proposition that cas records were entitled to less protection than were counselling
records.
that finding is apposite in b.g.’s case.
v.        application of the law to
the facts
i have carefully considered the applicant’s
written and oral submissions in this matter. b.g. submits that the disputed
records may directly impact upon the credibility and reliability of the
complainants at trial. he claims that the records may have such effect by providing
insight into the family dynamics in which the applicant was said to have been
acting at the time of his alleged offending.
in the absence of an evidentiary or
informational anchor, a claim by an accused that the record sought is likely
relevant to the credibility or reliability of a complainant or witness is insufficient
on its own to overcome the general proscription in s. 278.3(4) of such claims being
capable of meeting the “likely relevant” threshold.
while the 2024 records appear to directly
implicate the accused’s ability to raise a reasonable doubt through their potential
impeachment value, the claim that the records from 2016, 2018, and 2022 are
“likely relevant” is peripheral at best.
i am not satisfied that the applicant has
discharged his onus of showing that there is a reasonable possibility that the
information sought is logically probative to an issue at trial or to the
competence of a witness to testify. the applicant has failed to point to any
case specific evidence or information concerning the disputed records that
might raise the possibility of these records being “likely relevant” in this
proceeding.
nor do i find that production of the disputed
records is “necessary in the interests of justice”. in my view, the
complainants retain a substantial degree of privacy in these records. because
the privacy rights in these records are high, and the records themselves appear
to be of dubious probative value, their production is not constitutionally
required for the applicant to make a full answer and defence to these charges.
b.g.’s argument that production of smfc’s records
concerning his children would result in a mitigated or lack of prejudice to the
complainants’ privacy interests – because,
what’s the harm
of a parent
receiving full disclosure about their own children – is only superficially convincing.
the right to privacy is a principle of
fundamental justice. it is a right that is protected under
s. 8
of the
canadian
charter of rights and freedoms
. the values underlying the privacy interest
protected by
s. 8
are dignity, integrity and autonomy (see
r. v. plant
,
1993 canlii 70 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 281 at p. 292). the protections afforded by
s. 8
include the
right to be left alone by the state, which encompasses the ability to control
the dissemination of private information vis-à-vis the state (see
r. v.
tessling
,
2004 scc 67 (canlii)
, 3 s.c.r. 432, at para.
23
). an order for production of
records made pursuant to ss. 278.1 to 278.91 is a “seizure” within the meaning
of section 8 of the
charter
(see
mills
, at paras.
77, 86, 88
). the
rights to personal dignity and the privacy of the persons to whom these records
relate should not casually be disturbed, and not without reasonable justification
for doing so.
the right to privacy at play in this case must
be balanced against another principle of fundamental justice, the applicant’s
competing right to make a full answer and defence. neither right is absolute. the
margins of where one right ends and another begins are necessarily mutually referential
and will ebb and flow based on the facts and context of the individual case.
with that said, in every case – including in circumstances
where an applicant is the parent of a complainant – trial courts must remain
disciplined in their approach to the production of records in sexual assault cases,
exercising fidelity to the statutory scheme established in ss. 278.1 to 278.91.
the law requires it, and the privacy interests of all complainants, perhaps especially
of children, warrant it.
having considered the factors set out in s. 278.5,
i conclude that it is not necessary for me to examine the 2016, 2018 and 2022
records to determine whether they should be produced to enable b.g. to make
full answer and defence in this case. this is not a borderline case where the
court should err on the side of production to the court in the interests of
justice.
vi.      disposition
the applicant’s application for production of
the disputed smfc records is dismissed.
released:  8
october 2025
signed: justice c.a. brannagan