ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. rouleau
,
2025 oncj 485
date:
2025 09 25
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 24 47101609
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
shelden
rouleau
reasons
for sentence
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
september 18 and 25, 2025
reasons
released september 25, 2025
raymond woloshyn-chick
.............................................................. counsel
for the crown
jason alsbergas
............................................................................. counsel
for the offender
garg j.:
overview
mr. shelden rouleau forced his way into a
neighbour’s home.
he ordered the women he found inside to their knees. fixing on one, he declared
that he was “going to have it” with her and gestured toward his groin. he
threatened to cut her throat if she did not “shut up”. he pulled her toward him
and tore the strap of her nightgown, exposing her breast.
mr. rouleau is a youthful first offender who takes
complete accountability for his crimes. the evidence suggests his risk to
public safety might be manageable with appropriate supervision. balancing these
factors against the gravity of the offences, i impose the sentence sought by
the crown: four years’ imprisonment, less credit for pre-sentence custody and
restrictive bail conditions, resulting in a remaining custodial term of 43
months.
the offences
in the middle of the night, mr. rouleau entered
a hamilton home through an unlocked rear sliding door. inside the home were the
victim, her sister, and the victim’s two adult children. the victim was asleep
in the basement, her sister was sleeping on a cot on the main floor, and her
adult children were in bedrooms on the upper floor.
the victim awoke to the sound of her sister
screaming. when she reached the main floor, she encountered mr. rouleau. he
told her that he was not there to hurt anyone and made a heart-shaped gesture
with his hands. he then directed the victim and her sister to kneel in the
hallway in a posture resembling prayer. the victim, switching to her native
language, instructed her children upstairs to call the police.
mr. rouleau sat across from the women with his
legs spread apart. he stated, “i’m going to have it with both you, i’ll start
with you,” while pointing at the victim. he then pointed to his groin and told
her to “come here.” when she pleaded with him to stop, he said, “if you don’t
shut up, i’m going to,” and made a throat-cutting gesture with his finger. he
then pulled at the victim’s nightgown, ripping a strap. seeing police
flashlights outside, she signalled to her sister, and together they wrestled
with mr. rouleau. he resisted by kicking and punching the sister.
during this time, one of the adult children hid
in a closet while calling 911, speaking in whispers. moments later, the other
adult child also called 911. she reported that the victim was being attacked
and expressed her belief that she was dying and being tortured.
police arrived within minutes, gained entry, and
found the victim and her sister struggling with mr. rouleau on the main floor.
the two women were crying and hysterical. the victim’s breast was exposed. the
adult children were located upstairs. mr. rouleau was arrested.
mr. rouleau was intoxicated while committing the
offences due to his consumption of alcohol. he brought a bottle of alcohol with
him into the home.
mr. rouleau was found guilty of three offences: (1)
break and enter a dwelling house; (2) sexual assault of the victim; and (3)
utter threat to cause the victim’s death. mr. rouleau was not arraigned on
charges relating to the sister.
procedural history
mr. rouleau pleaded not guilty because he had no
memory of the events. however, he formally accepted the proof against him
through an agreed statement of fact:
r. v. d.m.g.
,
2011 onca 343
at paras.
49
, 57. mr. rouleau knew that findings of guilt would follow his admission
of the facts. no witnesses testified. for sentencing purposes, mr. rouleau
should be treated as though he pleaded guilty.
the offender
mr. rouleau is a young man with no criminal
record.
he was 20 years old at the time of the offences. he is single and has no
children.
he
is the only child of his parents. his parents each have other children, giving
mr. rouleau several half-sisters. he continues to have a very good relationship
with most of them. i will refer to them as sisters going forward to mirror how
they described themselves. mr. rouleau has enjoyed familial support throughout
the court process. he currently lives with a sister and her children. mr.
rouleau described his childhood as normal to him. he noted that he grew up free
from abuse.
when
mr. rouleau was young, his father, who was american, came into conflict with
the law and was no longer permitted to enter canada. his mother took him to
visit his father when he was very young but discontinued visits due to lack of
financial support. mr. rouleau reconnected with his father about a year before the
latter’s death, when mr. rouleau was ten years old.
other
father figures were only intermittently present. the father of two of his
sisters played a role in his life for a period, but that ended when the man
went to jail and his mother no longer permitted contact. an uncle was also a
father figure, but he passed away shortly before mr. rouleau’s father.
mr.
rouleau’s father and one of his sisters struggled with alcohol and associated aggressive
behaviour. according to mr. rouleau’s mother, mr. rouleau and this sister are
no longer close after an incident where she became intoxicated and abandoned
him while he was in her care. mr. rouleau himself reported issues with alcohol,
beginning to binge drink two to three days a week in the years before the
offences. his mother and sister reported that he has not consumed alcohol since
the offences. they believe that alcohol played a factor in his commission of
the offences. other than alcohol, mr. rouleau does not abuse substances and
does not consume illegal drugs.
as
a child, mr. rouleau struggled in school. he did not like going. he was
medicated for adhd and diagnosed with an intellectual or learning disability. his
grades ranged from 50% to 60% but could rise to 70% when he applied himself. the
materials before me include a psycho-educational assessment conducted when mr.
rouleau was 11 years old. he fell within the first percentile on several cognitive
measures and scored higher on others.
there
is also a family history of intellectual and mental health issues. mr.
rouleau’s father was reported to have such difficulties, and his maternal uncle
has schizophrenia. mr. rouleau reports no mental health issues other than
feeling anxious and depressed about his current situation.
mr.
rouleau did not complete high school, leaving in grade eleven to join the work
force. he was employed with a demolition company at the time of his arrest as a
general labourer. he was a good employee. he was punctual, never had issues on
job sites, and got along with customers and fellow employees. he has not been
working since the charges due to his release conditions, but he is welcome back
notwithstanding the offences and anticipated jail sentence.
mr.
rouleau has expressed remorse for his actions and a willingness to participate
in programming to address his issues. he was polite and cooperative with the
author of the pre-sentence report and visibly upset when discussing his
actions.
positions of the parties
the
crown seeks a global four-year prison sentence less credit for
pre-sentence custody and restrictive bail conditions. the defence, after these
credits, asks that mr. rouleau receive a prison sentence of two years and one
day. the parties agree on the ancillary orders.
general principles
the
goal of any sentence under the
criminal code
is
to protect society, contribute to respect for the law, and help maintain a
just, peaceful, and safe society. the fundamental principle of sentencing is to
impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
offender’s degree of responsibility. the sentence that i impose must be
tailored to mr. rouleau’s circumstances and the circumstances of the offences
that he committed.
specific deterrence and rehabilitation are often the primary
sentencing principles for youthful first offenders:
r. v. priest
,
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
, 30
o.r. (3d) 538, o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.) at paras.
17
, 22. the custodial term
should reflect the offender’s personal circumstances and not be extended solely
for the purpose of general deterrence:
priest
at para.
23
. however, mr.
rouleau committed serious and violent offences. in those circumstances, the
objectives of denunciation and general deterrence gain prominence:
r. v. thurairajah
,
2008 onca 91
at para.
41
. see also
r. v. tan
,
2008 onca 574
at paras.
30-33
;
r. v. mohenu
,
2019 onca
291
at paras.
12-13
.
description of
the offences: home invasion?
it matters whether mr. rouleau’s offences are
properly called a “home invasion”.
in a comprehensive survey of the case law, blair j.a. of the ontario court of
appeal held that sentences for home invasions range from as low as four or five
years to as high as 11 to 13 years—well beyond the range suggested by the
parties. this broad range reflects the elastic nature of the underlying offences
and the myriad circumstances to which the label might attach. public
protection, general deterrence, and denunciation are the priority sentencing
objectives, without ignoring rehabilitation. a stiff penitentiary sentence is
usually required:
r. v. wright
, 83 o.r. (3d) 427,
2006 canlii 40975
(c.a.)
at paras.
18
, 23, 24.
“home invasion” is not defined in the
criminal
code
; it was coined by the common law to capture a particular
affront to the security of the dwelling. the ontario court of
appeal, in a decision once again penned by blair j.a., supplied the following
definition in
r. v. j.s.
, 81 o.r. (3d) 511,
2006 canlii 22101 (c.a.)
at
paras.
32-33
:
… the main features of home invasion include breaking and
entering a dwelling place for purposes of committing a theft or robbery,
knowing that (or being reckless as to whether) the home is being occupied, and
using or threatening to use violence. the presence of weapons is often a
factor, as is the confinement of the occupants of the home in some fashion.
for the offence to qualify as a home invasion, i would add
to the foregoing that the entry to the dwelling need not be only for the
purposes of robbery or theft—or result in those offences being committed. the
crimes committed within the dwelling may include other offences involving
violence against the person, as, for example, assault, sexual assault or
unlawful confinement.
measured against that definition, it is difficult
to see how mr. rouleau did not commit a home invasion. he broke into the home.
he confined and threatened the occupants. he committed violent offences. he
sexually assaulted the victim. the only real question is temporal: whether he
entered
for the purpose
of committing a violent offence or formed that
intention after gaining entry.
the record supports the former inference. there
is no evidence of mr. rouleau having a purpose that might have allowed him to
avoid the occupants—no suggestion, for example, of entering for a surreptitious
property theft. on the contrary, the evidence suggests mr. rouleau knew that women
would be inside since they were his neighbours.
that said, i will not affix the “home invasion” label given how
the case was litigated before me. the proceedings were akin to a guilty plea. the
evidence was adduced primarily through an agreed statement of fact that does
not speak to mr. rouleau’s purpose for entering the home. the home invasion label
was not a focal point in submissions. had it been, the defence might have
argued that mr. rouleau’s significant intoxication explained his entry rather
than a settled plan to sexually assault the occupants.
even without the label, the judicial commentary on home invasions
remains instructive when assessing the gravity of mr. rouleau’s offences. i
will elaborate when examining the aggravating factors in this case.
aggravating
factors
sexual assault and residential break and enter
are each a serious offence in their own right. they inflict distinct
harms: violation of bodily integrity and violation of the home. when the
offences are committed together, they create an aggravated form of criminality.
mr. rouleau broke into a home at night,
terrorized and confined the occupants, threatened them with violence, and
sexually assaulted one of them. it is those facts—and not the home invasion
label—that elevate the gravity of each offence beyond others of its kind. sexual violence carried across the
threshold of a dwelling violates the victim’s bodily integrity and the sanctity
of the place where they are entitled to feel most secure, shattering their
sense of safety and exploiting their vulnerability:
wright
at para.
14
;
j.s.
at para.
34
. as nordheimer j. (as he then was) explained in
r. v. p.h.
,
o.j. no. 885 (sup. ct.) at para. 72
: “whatever may happen in the outside
world, people have an innate feeling that their homes are their one inviolate
sanctuary”.
there is direct evidence through the victim
impact statements on how the offences significantly impacted the victim and her
family. these impacts are statutorily aggravating pursuant to s. 718.2(a)(iii.1).
the victim described how she was terrified for
her life during the events. she has not been the same person since. any small
sound or sudden movement around the house causes her flashbacks. she lives in
constant fear of encountering mr. rouleau. her ability to trust others,
especially men, has been damaged. she continues to suffer pain and discomfort
from the physical force of the assault. she has also suffered financially from spending
time off work, repairing damage to the house, and investing in security improvements.
the offences impacted everyone in the home. the
victim’s sister was visiting from zimbabwe at the time. she described her
trauma and resulting paranoia from the events. she now feels like someone is
watching from anywhere and might break in. the victim’s son, who called 911
while hiding in a closet, described the terrifying experience: “hearing [my
mother] scream and begging for us not to come downstairs made me feel powerless
and useless”. he was supposed to finish his bachelor of science in nursing, but
the incident impacted his academics and delayed his graduation. the victim’s daughter,
who thought her mother was being killed, described the break-in as one of the
most terrifying experiences of her life. the voice of a strange male threatening
her mother and aunt left lasting emotional scars. “hearing my mother cry and
scream for help, asking us not to come downstairs and call 911 while we were
upstairs, was deeply traumatic”. the incident occurred while she was recovering
from cancer. the stress, fear, and sleepless nights have placed an additional
toll on her health and slowed her recovery.
mitigating
factors
there are several mitigating factors in this
case. first, mr. rouleau takes accountability for the offences. his acceptance
of the agreed statement of fact was tantamount to a guilty plea. the victim and
her family were not required to testify. mr. rouleau told the author of the
pre-sentence report that he was “deeply upset by his actions”. he apologized to
the victim and her family during his allocution to the court.
second, there is evidence that mr. rouleau’s
risk to public safety is manageable. the author of the pre-sentence report
opined that mr. rouleau “presents as a manageable risk in the community”. i did
not take the author to be offering an expert opinion. she did not rely on any
validated risk assessment tools. rather, the author was summarizing the factors
that speak to mr. rouleau’s rehabilitative potential. for example, mr. rouleau
has indicated a willingness to attend programming, including for alcohol abuse
and sexual deviance. indeed, mr. rouleau asked the court to impose a
penitentiary sentence in part to gain access to programming. furthermore, i understand
that mr. rouleau has made efforts to abstain from alcohol, which shows insight
into how alcohol contributed to his offending. mr. rouleau also enjoys strong
support from his family. this support, which was evident in the courtroom, should
help mr. rouleau stay on a rehabilitative path.
third, i accept that the offences were out of
character for mr. rouleau. that does not mean, however, that his intoxicated
state is a mitigating factor. mr. rouleau chose to consume alcohol to the point
of intoxication. it is common sense that alcohol can loosen restraint and cloud
judgment, leading people down paths they would not tread in sobriety. by
drinking to excess that night, mr. rouleau increased his risk to the public:
see
r. v. brown
,
2022 scc 18
at para.
119
. he is
highly morally blameworthy for the crimes he committed. mr. rouleau does not
raise a defence; he does not suggest that his drunkenness would give rise to clear
scientific evidence of automatism:
brown
at para.
4
.
that said, mr. rouleau’s alcohol consumption
helps explain why he acted out of character:
r. v. breen
(1982),
1982 canlii 3889 (nl ca)
, 69
c.c.c. (2d) 554 (nfld. c.a.) at 557. the conclusion that he acted out of
character is backed by his status as a first offender and his numerous character
references. the letters paint a consistent picture of mr. rouleau as a gentle,
kind-hearted, and dependable young man whose actions on the night in question
were deeply out of character. those closest to him—family, friends,
mentors—describe a person who is remorseful, reflective, and committed to
personal growth, suggesting that he possesses genuine rehabilitative potential.
i cannot ignore the possibility that mr.
rouleau’s cognitive limitations affected his conduct, but i cannot assume that
they did:
r. v. storey
,
2025 onca 599
at para.
64
. based on the complete
evidentiary record, i do not regard mr. rouleau’s learning
disabilities as a significant mitigating factor. while they may have interacted
with his alcohol consumption to undermine his decision-making, the evidence
also shows his coherent and purposive conduct after breaking into the victim’s
home. mr. rouleau made clear why he was there and what he wanted. he sought to
reason with the women. he maintained control of his faculties, and there is no
basis to find that he failed to appreciate the nuances of his wrongdoing. learning
disabilities have also not prevented him from maintaining steady employment,
with no reported performance issues and appropriate workplace relationships—in
other words, there is no evidence that impulse control has been a significant
concern in mr. rouleau’s adult life.
whatever cognitive limitations exist, i am not persuaded that they contributed
in a meaningful way to the commission of the offences. in sum, they do little
to attenuate mr. rouleau’s moral blameworthiness: see
storey
at para.
66
.
analysis
i must impose the least intrusive sentence and the least quantum that
achieves the overall purpose of being an appropriate and just sanction:
r.
v. hamilton
, 72 o.r. (3d) 1,
2004 canlii 5549 (c.a.)
at para.
96
.
there is no clearly applicable sentencing range for the offences
committed by mr. rouleau. the four-to-thirteen-year range used in home invasion
cases, canvassed earlier in these reasons, is instructive but not determinative.
i made no home invasion finding; absent that predicate finding, the higher
range serves only as context for the gravity such a finding would attract. the
defence provided several ontario cases where the court imposed custodial terms
under four years, including
r. v. m.o.
,
2022 onsc 3162
(15 months);
r.
v. r.b.
,
2021 oncj 635
(20 months); and
r. v. nahwegezhic
,
2016 onsc
512
(two years less one day).
in my view, a significantly stiffer sentence is warranted given the
nature of the offences and the aggravating factors. as a judge of the ontario
court of justice, it is not my role to set sentencing ranges: see
r. v.
a.j.k.
,
2022 onca 487
at para.
72
. but i can consider principles articulated
by the appellate courts and assess whether they apply in the case before me. i
am guided by fairburn a.c.j.o.’s observation in
a.j.k.
at para.
75
that
“[a]s the years pass, enlightenment on the implications of sexual violence
continues to permeate our conscious minds”. i also note moldaver j’s statement
in
r. v. barton
,
2019 scc 33
at para.
1
that eliminating sexual violence
against women is one of the more pressing societal challenges, and the
direction from wagner c.j. and rowe j. in
r.  v. friesen
,
2020 scc
9
at para.
142
that a modern understanding of sexual violence requires greater
emphasis on the resulting psychological and emotional harm rather than fixating
on bodily integrity. while none of these cases mirror the facts before me,
they supply relevant principles that support the imposition of a
mid-single-digit penitentiary sentence.
mr. rouleau terrorized four people through his actions that
night. each continues to suffer the aftereffects. one child believed her mother
was being tortured and killed; another felt powerless to intervene. the fact
that mr. rouleau did not complete the sexual assault does not diminish his
moral culpability or the impact on the victim. she had every reason to think
her bodily integrity would be profoundly violated: she was ordered to her knees;
mr. rouleau told her he was going to “have it” with her and pointed to his
groin; and he threatened to slit her throat if she did not comply. as it were, mr.
rouleau physically violated her by grabbing her and exposing her breast. that
the assault did not escalate further is only due to the victim fighting back—resistance
that came at a cost, as she continues to suffer pain and discomfort.
mr. rouleau’s youth, remorse, prosocial supports,
lack of a prior criminal record, out-of-character conduct, and rehabilitative
potential all underscore the need for restraint in sentencing. the principles
of general deterrence and denunciation cannot eclipse specific deterrence and
rehabilitation. nonetheless, given the violent and terrorizing nature of the
offences, i am satisfied that general deterrence and denunciation must play an
important role:
thurairajah
at para.
41
.
there are cases that support a four-year term. the
circumstances of
r. v. perreault
,
2005 bcca 226
are similar: a break and
enter and sexual assault where the offender was highly intoxicated and acted
out of character. the british columbia court of appeal described the offence as
“a unique aberration … never likely to be repeated” (para. 20). the
court reduced a five-year sentence to four years. while defence counsel argued
that the facts in
perreault
were
more serious (e.g., the offender broke into two residences and committed sexual
assault in the second), the four-year sentence already reflected the
restrictive bail conditions whereas i will be granting further credit. in
r.
v. flatfoot
,
2009 mbca 109
, the manitoba court of appeal imposed four years
where the circumstances were once again similar: a youthful offender with a
minimal previous record where rehabilitation remained a key consideration
(para. 5), although the victim in that case was 15 years old. i disagree that
mr. rouleau’s personal circumstances are a distinguishing factor; i have no
information about the offender’s personal circumstances in
flatfoot
.
i therefore conclude that a four-year prison
sentence is proportionate to the gravity of the offences and mr. rouleau’s
degree of responsibility. i reach this conclusion mindful that a prison term
will separate mr. rouleau from his support structure and those who care about
him.
the evidence indicates that
this support structure, employment included, will stand ready on his return to
the community to aid his rehabilitative prospects. on that point, i emphasize
that defence counsel made thorough submissions and presented a wealth of
information, which included mr. rouleau’s character letters. but for these
efforts, and the crown’s position, i might have imposed a higher sentence.
disposition
i credit mr. rouleau for the nine days spent in
pre-sentence custody, which enhances to 14 days (approximately half a month).
mr. rouleau has spent approximately 18 months on
a restrictive house arrest bail.
mr. rouleau described the impact of the confinement on his life and mental
health in his affidavit. he could only leave the house in the presence of one
of two sureties, but his residential surety’s ability to accompany him was
limited because of her schooling. mr. rouleau was unable to continue his
employment. there is no indication, however, that he sought to vary or review
the conditions. the crown did not oppose me granting him credit for this time. i
give him credit for four months and 16 days (approximately four-and-a-half
months): see
r. v. downes
, 79 o.r. (3d) 321,
2006 canlii 3957 (c.a.)
at paras.
37
, 42-46.
the total credit for pre-sentence custody and
restrictive bail conditions is five months.
on count #1, break and enter, i impose a 42-month
jail sentence.
on count #2, sexual assault, i note the five
months credit and impose a concurrent 43-month jail sentence. i would have
imposed a 48-month sentence before giving credit.
on count #5, utter threats, i impose a
concurrent 12-month jail sentence.
i impose a weapons prohibition order under s.
109. the variable portion is set at 10 years.
the defence does not oppose a soira order. the
order is appropriate given the nature and seriousness of the offences and the
vulnerability of the victim. the duration is fixed at 20 years.
i impose an order that prohibits communication
with the victim and her family while in custody under 743.21.
i impose a dna order for these primary
designated offences.
i waive the victim surcharge given the lengthy
custodial term and lack of recent employment.
released:  september
25, 2025
signed: justice davin m.k. garg
identification of the offender could not identify the victim or her family.
these facts are not contained in the agreed statement of fact. they were subsequently
added orally on consent.
any youth entries are inaccessible pursuant to s. 120(6) of the
youth
criminal justice act
.
according to page 9 of the report, his relative strengths included executive
function in self-regulation and emotional control, immediate attention and
concentration in auditory tasks, memory for immediate and delayed verbal and
visual information, working memory for both auditory and visual material,
phonological processing in phonological memory, visual-spatial processing in
copying symbols, and perceptual-motor processing. his psychological processing
deficiencies included executive function in planning and organization,
immediate attention and concentration in visual tasks, phonological processing
in phonological awareness and rapid naming, language processing, visual-spatial
processing in visual discrimination, fluid reasoning, and visual processing
speed.
the crown’s initial position was that the offences were in the “style” of a
home invasion and fell “more on the home invasion end of the break and enter
spectrum”.
the psycho-educational assessment from when mr. rouleau was 11 years old refers
to his school performance being negatively affected by impulse control
problems, but self-regulation and emotional control were also listed as
relative strengths. while the pre-sentence report refers to mr. rouleau’s
willingness to address any impulsivity issues, that statement does not provide
evidence that cognitive limitations contributed to his inability to control his
impulses during the offences.
a.j.k.
concerned penetrative sexual assaults,
barton
was not a
sentence appeal, and
friesen
concerned the sexual assault of children.
there was no suggestion that mr. rouleau’s family would suffer in his absence in
the manner that would qualify as a collateral consequence: see
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
at paras.
42-44
.
mr. rouleau had spent 549 days on a house arrest bail at the time of
sentencing.