citation:
r. v. sheikh
, 2025 oncj 551
date:  2025·10·21
court
file no.: 4810-998-24-48118818
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his majesty  the  king
—  and  —
yousaf bilal sheikh
before
justice david porter
reasons
for sentence released october 21, 2025
m. sengupta-murray……………………………………………………………………...
for the crown
u. kancharla…………………………………………………………
counsel for the yousaf bilal sheikh
porter j:
yousaf bilal sheikh (mr. sheikh) entered a plea of guilty on
may 20,
2025 to one count of robbery on june 14,
2024,
contrary
to
section 343
(a) of the
criminal code
.
at the request of the defence,
the matter was adjourned several times after the pre-sentence report was
completed,
until a sentencing hearing was ultimately held on september
19, 2025.  these are my reasons for the sentence to be imposed today.
the following were the agreed facts admitted pursuant to
s.
655 of the
criminal code
on the plea of guilty on may 20, 2025:
“on march 6, 2023, yousaf
bilal sheikh was arrested and was charged with attempt murder as well as a
number of firearms offences.
on april 21, 2023, mr.
sheikh appeared in the toronto ontario court of justice
”
and entered into a release order.  the release order
included the following term:
2. remain in your residence at all times (house arrest), except
- for medical emergencies involving you or a member of your immediate
family (spouse, child, parent, sibling)
- when you are in the direct and continuous presence of your surety
salman bilal sheikh.
as of may 31, 2024, variations were granted to mr. sheikh’s
release to permit him to be out of his home in the direct and continuous
company of his mother, nabila malik, and to permit him to reside at his
mother’s residence in oakville.
as of june 14, 2024, mr. sheikh was still bound by the
release order.
on friday june 14, 2024 at approximately 2:30 p.m., mr.
sheikh approached a green mazda, operated by fanuel mehari, which was
northbound on parliament street and waiting to turn left onto front street in
the city of toronto.
mr. sheikh walked up to the vehicle and attempted to open the
front passenger-side door.  he then proceeded to the driver’s side door.  mr.
sheikh opened the driver’s side door and told mr. mehari to “get out of the
car, or i’ll shoot you.”  mr. sheikh then forced his way into the vehicle while
mr. mehari was still in the driver’s seat, causing mr. mehari to get out of his
vehicle.
mr. sheikh fled the scene in mr. mehari’s vehicle, travelling
westbound on front street.  he collided with a white bmw, causing minor damage
to the front bumper of the bmw.  he also rear-ended a white honda accord.
mr. sheikh did not stop following either collision.  he continued
to flee in the stolen vehicle, travelling westbound on front street and driving
erratically in the early afternoon on a weekday in a busy commercial area.
the green mazda then became inoperable, as all four tires
were flattened as a result of the collisions.  mr. sheikh then abandoned the
damaged green mazda on the street in the area of lower jarvis street and queens
quay east.  mr. sheikh approached another motor vehicle, which had been forced
to stop behind the green mazda he had abandoned.  he tried to enter that
vehicle by banging on the driver’s side window but was unable to do so as the
door was locked.
police constable (“pc”) wong, of the toronto police service,
had been on general patrol in the area.  the officer was called over by
civilian witnesses to the carjackings, and pursued mr. sheikh with the
assistance of a civilian driver.  pc wong caught up to mr. sheikh just after
mr. sheikh abandoned the green mazda and was attempting to enter other
vehicles.
mr. sheikh was arrested by pc wong of the toronto police
service at 2:37 p.m.  pc wong advised mr. sheikh of his right to speak to
counsel and caution.  mr. sheikh was transported to 51 division, and was held
for bail.  mr. sheikh did not have any weapons on his person when he was
arrested, and witnesses did not report seeing any weapon.
no injuries were reported by any victims.
the green mazda was damaged as a result of mr. sheikh’s
conduct while driving it. the damage is as follows: scratches, dents and white
paint transfer to the driver’s side door; scratches and dents to the driver’s
side of the vehicle; all wheels were flat and as such the vehicle was
inoperable.
the white honda accord, which mr. sheikh rear-ended, was also
damaged as follows: dents, bumps and scratches to the passenger-side rear
bumper.”
background of mr. sheikh
mr. sheikh is currently 23 years of age and was 22 years old
at the time of the offence.  he is single, a canadian citizen, and has no
dependents.  he has no prior criminal record.
prior to his arrest in relation to this offence, he lived
with his mother in oakville.
a pre-sentence report was prepared which indicated that he
has a close and supportive relationship with his family.
he grew up in toronto until the age of 19 in an area which
was described as a bad area.  mr. sheikh indicated that he had experienced the
deaths of friends due to gun violence and drug overdoses and that he had lost
four friends as a result.
at the age of 19, his family moved to courtice, ontario, and
at the age of 22, he moved to oakville where he lived with his mother.  he
completed his high school education as well as seven months of an it course at
a private college.  he acknowledged that his academic performance had been
“just above passing.”
at the age of 21, he obtained an it system tech position with
an insurance company where he worked.  he held this position, making $65,000
per year, at the time of his arrest on march 6, 2023 on the charge of attempted
murder, on which he was subject to a house arrest release order at the time of
his robbery offence on june 14, 2024.  on may 31, 2024, his release order was
varied to permit him to be out of his home in the direct and continuous company
of his mother nabila malik, and to live with her at her home in oakville.  this
was the release order in place at the time of his robbery offence.
mr. sheikh does not suffer from any addictions as, according
to the presentence report, while he had used marijuana since the age of 16 to
deal with stress, prior to his arrest he had stopped smoking marijuana, and
rarely consumed alcohol.
according to the presentence report, he had never had an
assessment, diagnosis, counselling, or any medication for mental health
concerns.
mr. sheikh entered a plea of guilty, a significant mitigating
circumstance.  while the plea was not entered at an early date, through counsel,
he indicated early in the proceedings an intention to plead guilty.
mr. sheikh filed a written statement to the court addressed
as a letter to the victim of his carjacking.  he expressed remorse for his
conduct and apologized to the victim for what he described as his horrible
actions that day.  he indicated he wished he could go back and change his
actions that he committed that day and expressed a determination to be a
changed person upon his release.  he stated that he was deeply sorry and
apologized to the victim any witnesses, society and the court system and
expressed sincere regret for his offence.
mr. sheikh had no prior convictions when he committed the
robbery offence in this case on june 14, 2024.  he was, however, on a release
order in relation to a charge of attempted murder on november 29, 2022 for
which he was arrested on march 6, 2023.  he was subsequently convicted of the
charge of attempted murder after trial.
the law
the general principles of sentencing are established in the
following provisions of the
criminal code
.
section 718
states:
“the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce
unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is
caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the
offender, and other persons, from committing offences;
(c) to separate
offenders from society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide
reparations for harm done to victims, or to the community; and
(f)  to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to
victims or to the community”
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
defines the
fundamental principle of sentencing:
“a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.”
in
r. v. ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
, the supreme court of
canada defined the principle of proportionality as follows at para. 37:
“the fundamental principle
of sentencing (i.e., proportionality) is intimately tied to the fundamental
purpose of sentencing – the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society
through the imposition of just sanctions.  whatever weight a judge may wish to
accord to the various objectives and other principles listed in the
code
,
the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental principle of
proportionality.  proportionality is the
sine qua non
of a
just sanction.  first, the principle ensures that a sentence reflects the
gravity of the offence.  this is closely tied to the objective of
denunciation.  it promotes justice for victims and ensures public confidence in
the justice system.  as wilson j. expressed in her concurring judgment in
re
b.c. motor vehicle act
,
1985 canlii 81 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 486, at p. 533:
“it is basic to any theory
of punishment that the sentence imposed bear some relationship to the offence;
it must be a “fit” sentence proportionate to the seriousness of the offence.
only if this is so can the public be satisfied that the offender “deserved” the
punishment he received and feel a confidence in the fairness and rationality of
the system.
second, the principle of
proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what is appropriate,
given the moral blameworthiness of the offender.  in this sense, the principle
serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures justice for the
offender.  in the canadian criminal justice system, a just sanction is one that
reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not elevate one at the
expense of the other.”
in its decision in
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
, the
supreme court of canada reaffirmed the importance of the principle of
proportionality in sentencing.  the majority stated at paragraphs 10 and 12:
“the goal in every case is
a fair, fit and principled sanction.  proportionality is the organizing
principle in reaching this goal.  unlike other principles of sentencing set out
in the
criminal code
, proportionality stands alone following the heading
“fundamental principle” (
s. 718.1
).  accordingly, “[a]ll sentencing starts with
the principle that sentences must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender” (
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at para.
30
).  the principles of parity and individualization,
while important, are secondary principles.
….
as to the relationship of individualization
to proportionality and parity, this court in
lacasse
aptly observed:
proportionality is
determined both on an individual basis, that is, in relation to the accused him
or herself and to the offence committed by the accused, and by comparison with
sentences imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
[para. 53]
individualization is
central to the proportionality assessment.  whereas the gravity of a particular
offence may be relatively constant, each offence is “committed in unique
circumstances by an offender with a unique profile” (para. 58).  this is why
proportionality sometimes demands a sentence that has never been imposed in the
past for a similar offence.  the question is always whether the sentence
reflects the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility
and the unique circumstances of each case (para. 58).”
section 718.2
of the
criminal code
states, in part,
“a court that imposes a
sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced
to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence, or the offender, ...
(b)
a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on
similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c)
where consecutive sentences are imposed,
the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders...”
sentencing ranges
in
r
. v.
lacasse,
2015 scc 64 (canlii)
, 3 s.c.r. 1089 the
court makes it clear that sentencing ranges are important guidelines in
sentencing,
but do not create hard and fast rules,
whatever the
circumstances of the offender.
the court stated at paras 58 and 60:
“
there
will always be situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range:
although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the
fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a
unique profile cannot be disregarded.  the determination of a just and
appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a
purely mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that are
difficult to define with precision. this is why it may happen that a sentence
that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may never have
been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit. once
again, everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree
of responsibility and the specific circumstances of each case.  lebel j.
commented as follows on this subject:
a judge can order a
sentence outside that range as long as it is in accordance with the principles
and objectives of sentencing.  thus, a sentence falling outside the regular
range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily unfit.  regard must be had to
all the circumstances of the offence and the offender, and to the needs of the
community in which the offence occurred. (
nasogaluak
, at para.
44
) ....
in other words,
sentencing ranges are primarily guidelines, and not hard and fast rules:
nasogaluak
,
at para.
44
.  as a result, a deviation from a
sentencing range is not synonymous with an error of law or an error in
principle.  sopinka j. stated this clearly in
mcdonnell
, although
he was referring in that case to categories of assault:
…in my view it can
never be an error in principle in itself to fail to place a particular offence
within a judicially created category of assault for the purposes of sentencing . . . .
if the categories are defined narrowly, and deviations from the categorization
are generally reversed, the discretion that should be left in the hands of the
trial and sentencing judges is shifted considerably to the appellate courts.
[para. 32]”
rehabilitation
as noted by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
, at para.
4
:
“
one
of the main objectives of canadian criminal law is the rehabilitation of
offenders.  rehabilitation is one of the fundamental moral values that distinguish
canadian society from the societies of many other nations in the world, and it
helps the courts impose sentences that are just and appropriate.”
the sentencing principle of rehabilitation is important when
sentencing a first offender, as is the case with mr. sheikh.
the court of appeal has also stressed the principle of
restraint in imposing a custodial sentence on a first offender.  as gillese
j.a. stated in
r. v. batisse,
2009 onca 114 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 452 at paras.
32-34
:
“ the principle of
restraint operates in three ways in the present case.  first, it is an
important consideration because the appellant was a first offender.  as such,
the restraint principle requires that the sentencing judge consider all
sanctions apart from incarceration and where, as here, incarceration must be
imposed, the term should be as short as possible and tailored to the individual
circumstances of the accused: see
r. v. priest
(1996),
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
, 30 o.r. (3d) 538,
o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.), at p. 545 o.r. [page 651]
second, the principle of restraint requires the sentencing judge to consider
rehabilitation in determining the appropriate length of the sentence. in
lowering a sentence given to a first offender, this court stated in
r. v.
blanas
,
2006 canlii 2610 (on ca)
, o.j. no.
364, 207 o.a.c. 226 (c.a.), at para.
5
:
[g]eneral deterrence cannot
be the sole consideration. the appellant is relatively youthful and has no
prior record and appears to have the full support of her family and community.
appropriate consideration must be given to the rehabilitation of the appellant.
in
serious cases and cases involving violence, rehabilitation alone is not the
determinative factor -- general deterrence and denunciation are also
significant factors to be considered.  however, as this court ruled in
r. v.
dubinsky
, o.j. no. 862,
2005 canlii 5668 (c.a.)
, at para.
1
, it is an error to focus almost
exclusively on general deterrence and fail to consider individual deterrence
and rehabilitation, especially when sentencing a first offender.”
in its recent decision in
r. v. wesley
,
2025 onca 51
,
at paras.
100-102
, the court stated the following:
“  youth is a
mitigating factor in sentencing:
r. v. hills
,
2023 scc 2
, 477 d.l.r. (4th) 1, at
para.
161
. this court recently reiterated
in
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
, at para.
31
, that when sentencing youthful first-time
adult offenders, judges must practice restraint
,
prioritize rehabilitation and account for immaturity, which may mitigate
culpability even when it does not excuse the offence.
in
this case, while there is no excuse for the appellant’s actions, which had
grievous consequences, it is clear that youthful immaturity may well have
played a role in his decision to drink to such excess. moreover, and in any
event, his youth and lack of prior record demonstrate that he has significant
potential for rehabilitation.
because of
their high rehabilitative prospects, youthful offenders should benefit from the
shortest possible sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence:
hills
, at para.
165
;
r. v. brown
,
2015 onca 361
, 126 o.r. (3d) 797, at
para.
7
.”
mr. sheikh had no prior convictions when he committed the
robbery offence in this case on june 14, 2024.  he was, however, on a release
order in relation to a charge of attempted murder on november 29, 2022 for which
he was arrested on march 6, 2023.  he was subsequently convicted of the charge
of attempted murder.  as he had not been convicted prior to the robbery offence,
it is not a prior conviction for sentencing purposes.  he is a youthful first
offender in relation to the robbery offence.  however, pursuant to lord coke’s
principle, the serious conviction for attempted murder does indicate a pattern
of ongoing offending relevant to mr. sheikh’s current rehabilitative potential:
r. v. wisdom
,
2024 onsc 4047
,
per
code j.at para. 41;
r. v.
graham
,
2018 onsc 6817
at para.
30-32
, affirmed
2020 onca 692
.
sentencing for carjacking
in
r. v. noor
,
2007 canlii 44822
, clarke j. considered
the applicable principles applicable to a sentence for robbery, in the context
of carjacking, after trial for a youthful offender, with one prior weapons
conviction, who engaged in carjacking of a motor vehicle, with another man.  mr.
noor’s accomplice threatened to shoot the driver of the car if he did not
relinquish the car.  the driver left the car and mr. noor and his accomplice
sped away.
at para. 22, clarke j. stated:
“at the risk of stating the
obvious, robbery is a very serious offence, as demonstrated by the fact that it
is punishable by life imprisonment.  carjacking is a serious type of robbery.  the
average person enjoys a degree of privacy and, more importantly, feels a sense
of security while travelling in his or her motor car, as opposed to walking or
using public transport.  although not so sacrosanct as the expectation to be
secure in one’s own home, as the excerpts from the cases that follow make
plain, the expectation to be able to travel about the community in safety in
one’s own vehicle is recognized as a fundamental value of canadian society.  this
value is something to be assiduously fostered and protected.”
after reviewing applicable sentencing precedents, clarke j. stated
at para. 26:
“...... while obviously a
sentencing court must take account of all applicable principles of sentencing,
including rehabilitation, i conclude that denunciation and deterrence, both
general and specific, must be the predominant sentencing considerations for
this type of offence.”
a sentence of 3.5 years less credit for pre-sentence custody
was imposed.
in
r. v. cassanova-alman
,
2023 onsc 1470
, f. dawson, j.
considered the sentence to be imposed, after trial, for a racialized young
person, who was 19 at the time of the offence who, had a prior youth record for
2 robberies, who committed a car jacking after fleeing a robbery of a pharmacy
he committed with an accomplice.
in the course of fleeing from the police, the accused jumped
into the rear passenger seat of a pickup truck, and when the driver refused to
help him, he climbed into the front seat and pushed the driver out of the
truck.  he drove off in the pickup truck at a high speed. when he learned that
there was an eight-year-old daughter of the driver in the truck, he stopped and
let the girl out, and then took off again in the in the truck while pursued by
the police.  he subsequently abandoned the truck and escaped from the police on
foot.
at paragraph 50 of his decision, f. dawson j stated:
“focusing on the
carjacking, i have been referred to two helpful decisions of clarke j. where he
undertook a review of sentencing cases related to carjacking robberies. see
r.
v. noor
,
o.j. no. 4092 (s.c.j.)
and
r. v. enotie
,
o.j.
no. 6246 (s.c.j.)
.  at para. 22 of
noor
, clarke j. noted that carjacking
is a particularly serious form of robbery given that people expect to travel in
safety and privacy in their own motor vehicles.  in
enotie
, at paras.
31-40, clarke j. reviewed 10 cases to determine a range of sentence.  the
sentences imposed in the cases considered ranged from two years to 16 years.  the
facts in the case at the very high end were extreme and involved other serious
offences.  i agree with crown counsel submissions that typically sentences for
carjacking are from about 3½ to 5 years in length.  i point out that weapons
are often involved in carjacking cases.”
in that case, justice dawson imposed a sentence of three
years concurrent for the carjacking robbery and for the related dangerous
driving.  the sentence was consecutive to one year for the pharmacy robbery, for
a total sentence of 4 years, less pre-sentence custody calculated with a credit
of 1.5:1 for each day of actual custody served.
in imposing the sentence, he stated at paragraph 74: “i have
placed weight on the accused’s youthfulness and prospects for rehabilitation as
well as on the need for denunciation and deterrence.  the harsh conditions
during presentence custody are also a factor.”
conclusion
in her very fair submissions, crown counsel submits that, taking
into account all of the relevant aggravating and mitigating circumstances, a
custodial sentence of two years less a day, less presentence custody, is the
appropriate sentence in this case, giving full effect to mr. sheikh’s status as
a youthful first offender, entitled to a sentence which gives appropriate
consideration to restraint and rehabilitation.
the crown submits that the mitigating circumstances in this
case include his guilty plea, which was not made at the earliest opportunity,
but which to his credit was indicated as his intention at an early date in
judicial pre-trials.
the crown also notes as a mitigating factor his status as a
youthful first offender, who has strong family supports and a positive home
environment, and that he completed education and was employed at the time of
his arrest on his attempted murder charges.
by way of aggravating factors, the crown notes, in the
absence of a victim impact statement, the inevitable serious impact on a victim
who experiences a carjacking, after having been threatened that if he did not
turn over his car to mr. sheikh, he would be shot. while mr. sheikh did not
have a firearm, his threat to use a firearm is nevertheless an aggravating
circumstance.
the fact that the offence was committed in breach of a
condition of his house arrest bail on a charge of attempted murder is a further
aggravating circumstance.
defence counsel does not challenge the aggravating
circumstances but places substantial reliance upon mr. sheikh’s guilty plea,
his status as a youthful first offender, the remorse indicated in his statement
to the court, his supportive family, his education and employment history and
the favourable pre-sentence report.
defence counsel notes the substantial mitigating effect of
the harsh pre-sentence custody, including triple bunking for 68 days and 166
days of full or partial lockdowns.  defence counsel submits that the
appropriate sentence is in the 9-to-12 month range.  she submits that 6 months
of mr sheikh’s actual pre-sentence custody gives him an enhanced credit of 9
months.  she submits that an additional
duncan
credit should create a
further 3-month credit, for an effective sentence of 12 months satisfied by
using 6 months of his available pre-sentence custody.
in her written submission, crown counsel states that the
sentence proposed by the crown of two years less one day is “at the very low
end of the appropriate range of sentence described in the case law”.  i agree
with this submission.
in my opinion, giving full effect to the mitigating
circumstances in this case, including mr. sheikh’s youth, his status as a
youthful first offender, the principle of restraint that should apply in this
context, and the importance of the principle of rehabilitation for youthful
first offenders, the appropriate sentence in this case having regard to the
serious nature of the offence, and mr. sheikh’s substantial moral
blameworthiness, is a sentence of two years less a day of actual incarceration,
prior to any reduction for harsh pre-sentence custody, and prior to the
application of
summers
credit.
pre-sentence custody
as previously noted, mr. sheikh was on a release order for
attempted murder when he committed the robbery in this case on june 14, 2024.  as
a result of this charge, he was subsequently detained on both the attempted
murder charge and the robbery charge which is the subject of this sentencing.
while mr. sheikh was subsequently convicted of the attempted
murder charge, counsel advises that none of the pre-sentence custody since his
arrest on june 15, 2024 has been applied in that sentencing.
counsel calculated the pre-sentence custody to september 19, 2025,
the date of the sentencing hearing, as 462 real days, so that it is now 462 +
32 = 494 real days of pre-sentence custody to october 21, 2025.  at an enhanced
credit of 1.5 days for every day of pre-sentence custody as
summers
credit, his enhanced credit is now 741 days.
mr. sheikh filed lockdown records for the toronto south
detention centre documenting that between june 16, 2024 and june 23, 2025, he
experienced 166 full or partial lockdown days due to staff shortages at the
toronto south detention centre.
records from the toronto south detention centre also
documented that he was incarcerated with three inmates in a cell for 68 days of
his detention.
mr. sheikh deposes in an affidavit filed at the sentencing
hearing that the lockdowns he experienced were “extremely harsh” as he would be
confined to his cell without contact with the outside world, which he found
difficult, as his mother was experiencing health challenges, and he found it
very difficult not to be in contact with his parents.
he deposes that during the lockdowns, at times, there was no
shower and the inmates had to choose between a shower and a phone call.  when
he was triple-bunked, it often meant that he would be sleeping near the toilet.
he deposes that he practices the muslim faith and prays five
times a day, and being confined with three persons in a cell made it difficult
to pray on the prayer mat during lockdown times when he was confined to his
cell.  he deposed that during the lockdowns he felt anxious, miserable sad and
punished.
mr. sheikh’s evidence on the harshness of his pre-sentence
incarceration was not challenged by the crown, and i accept it.
numerous decisions from the ontario superior court of justice
have commented on the harsh and unacceptable conditions of incarceration at the
toronto south detention centre frequently described as unacceptable, shocking,
deplorable, harsh and oppressive:  see
r. v. persad
,
2020 onsc 188
,
per
schreck j. at para. 31.
the harshness of pre-sentence incarceration is properly
considered as a mitigating circumstance in determining the sentence in any
case:
r. v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344
,
per
doherty j.a. at paras. 50-53.
i agree with and adopt justice molloy’s observation on the
appropriateness of assigning a numerical reduction to the sentence to reflect
the mitigating effect of harsh pre-sentence custody where she states in
r. v.
shaikh and tanoli
,
2024 onsc 774
, at paras.
22-23
:
“
with the greatest of respect for the guidance provided by the
court of appeal for ontario in
marshall
,
i consider it
preferable, not merely acceptable, to quantify the period of time by which a
sentence is reduced to reflect the harsh and punitive conditions of pre-trial
custody provided for in
duncan
.  i take no issue with this being
properly characterized as a mitigating factor, nor that it should not be used
so liberally as to make a sentence unfit.  however, in my opinion, the
duncan
credit
by its nature, lends itself to being expressed numerically, which is not the
case for other kinds of mitigating factors, such as remorse, youth, and the
like.
transparency and consistency are two important underlying
principles of sentencing that are best served by specifying the amount of
the
duncan
credit.  if a sentencing judge merely states that
the punitive pre-trial custody conditions have been factored in, without
specifying how, neither the accused, the public, the government, nor correctional
officials will know the extent to which this has been done.  in the result,
there will be no public knowledge of the impact deplorable conditions in the
prisons are having on the sentences served by offenders, providing little
incentive to those in authority to fix the problem.  while the amount of credit
to be given is a matter of discretion to which deference would typically be
afforded, sentencing judges being transparent about the amount of the sentence
reduction given will also provide a better opportunity for appellate oversight
and error correction.”
i agree with justice molloy that transparency and consistency
favour assigning a specific reduction to a sentence to reflect
duncan
credit for harsh pre-sentence incarceration.
however, this credit must not be such as to make the sentence
imposed unfit:
r. v. marshall
, supra,
at paras.
50-53
.
as previously noted, i agree with the crown that the crown’s
position that a sentence of 2 years less a day is at the very low end of the
range for this offence.
in my opinion, a reduction of 60 days in the sentence that
would otherwise be imposed is appropriate in this case to reflect the
mitigating effect of mr. sheikh’s harsh pre-sentence incarceration.  while i
accept that the conditions he experienced were harsh and deplorable, any
further reduction beyond a reduction of 60 days for the mitigating effect of
his harsh pre-sentence incarceration, below the sentence of 2 years less a day,
would make the sentence disproportionate to the seriousness of the offence and
the degree of responsibility of mr. sheikh in committing this offence.
in conclusion, the total sentence to be served is 2 years
less a day (729 days) - 60 days
duncan
credit, for a sentence of 669
days.
mr. sheikh is entitled to
summers
credit for the pre-sentence
custody calculated at 1.5 to 1 for the pre-sentence custody he has served.  of
his total pre-sentence custody, he is entitled to apply an enhanced credit of 669
days, based on the application of 446 days of the 494 days of actual
pre-sentence custody he has served.
on the basis that this enhanced pre-sentence custody is
available to be applied to this sentence, the sentence of 669 days is satisfied
by the application of 446 days of his actual days of pre-sentence custody to
this sentence.
accordingly, upon the application of enhanced pre-sentence
custody credit of 669 days, the sentence is a suspended sentence.
there will be a probation order for 3 years on the following
terms:
in addition to the statutory terms:
report to a probation officer within two business days of your release
from custody, and thereafter as directed;
do not have any contact, directly or indirectly, by any means,
physical, electronic, or otherwise with fanuel mehari or ali hazrati;
do not be within 100 m of fanuel mehari or ali hazrati, or anywhere you
know them to live, work, worship, go to school, or otherwise know them to be.
attend for any assessment, counselling, and treatment as directed by
your probation officer;
sign any releases necessary to allow your probation officer to monitor
your compliance with the terms of your probation;
attend school for further education or make reasonable efforts to
obtain employment and provide proof of this to your probation officer;
perform 200 hours of community service in the first 18 months of your
probation period;
do not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
;
do not apply for any firearms certificate or licence.
for the first 12 months of your probation period, do not have care or
control of a motor vehicle.
there will be a dna order pursuant to
ss. 487.04
and
487.051
(1)
of the
criminal code
in relation to the primary designated offence
of robbery.
there will be a weapons prohibition under section 109 for 10
years.
as mr. sheikh was gainfully employed when he committed the
offence, there will be a victim fine surcharge ordered in the amount of $200.00
pursuant to s.737 (2)(b)(ii), with 2 years to pay.
dated:   october 21,
2025                                       _________________________
justice
david porter