ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. e.g.-g.
, 2025 oncj 199
date:  2025 11 04
newmarket, ontario
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
e.g-g.
before justice r.m. robinson
heard on 9 december 2024 and 10 february 2025
judgment on sentence released on 11 april 2025
david levy........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
julianna
schiller......................................................................................
counsel for e.g-g.
robinson j.:
introduction
on 9 december 2024, e.g-g.
pleaded guilty before me to one count of publishing an intimate image without
consent, contrary to
s.162.1
of the
criminal code
[“
cc
”]. the
crown proceeded summarily.
sentencing submissions
were made on 10 february 2025, at which time i also received a pre-sentence
report [“psr”].
the crown seeks a
custodial sentence of four months, followed by two years probation. in
addition, the crown seeks ancillary orders including a dna order and a
sex
offender information registration act
[“
soira
”] order for 10 years.
the defence submits
that a conditional discharge would achieve all of the objectives of sentencing
and would be consistent with the various principles of sentencing. in the
alternative, the defence invites me to impose a conditional sentence of
imprisonment.
these are my reasons
for sentence.
the offence
while mr. e.g.-g. and
r.s. were in a relationship, r.s. consented to mr. e.g.-g. recording their
sexual activity for their own personal use only. she did not consent to mr.
e.g.-g. disseminating the material to anyone else.
the couple broke up at
the end of 2020. thereafter, r.s. resumed a relationship with someone else who
she had dated in 2017.
on 26 january 2023, a
friend contacted r.s. to advise her that he stumbled across her intimate photos
and videos on the website reddit. he forwarded a link to r.s. when she clicked
on the link, it took her to mr. e.g.-g.’s page with multiple photos of her and
a link to a drop box with multiple videos in it. the drop box had a reference
to r.s.’ current boyfriend’s name.
the materials on reddit
consisted of 10 explicit photos and multiple videos of r.s., nude, mr. e.g.-g.
nude, and both of them engaging in intercourse. r.s.’ face and her identifiable
tattoos were clearly shown. while the photos and videos were posted in the
forum for “girls of toronto” and “brown hotties,” fortunately they were not
tagged with r.s.’ name.
mr. e.g.-g. admits that
he posted the materials without r.s.’ consent or knowledge. he says he did so
while he was heavily intoxicated and not as a means of extracting revenge on
r.s.
the
offender
at the time that mr.
e.g.-g. posted the material on reddit, he was 27 years old. he is now 29. he
has no criminal record.
i received a psr
prepared by probation and parole officer raman gill.
i also received
substantial material in support of mr. e.g.-g.’s character, including:
(1)
letter from his father,
j.a.g.;
(2)
letter from his
grandmother, g.l.;
(3)
letter from his mother,
g.g.;
(4)
letter from his friend,
randolph leonardo;
(5)
letter from his
girlfriend, s.u.;
(6)
letter from his friend,
kenny albayero amaya;
(7)
letter from his friend,
alex huynh;
(8)
letter from his friend,
mathias menezes; and
(9)
letter from ernesto l.,
dietary aide supervisor at humber river hospital.
i was also provided with
written confirmation that mr. e.g.-g. completed seven 60-minute sessions of the
sexual boundary program provided by just for today, as well as written
confirmation that mr. e.g.-g. completed 100.25 hours of community service with
the yonge street mission.
collectively, the
materials before me paint a portrait of a young man who has touched the lives
of many family members and members of the community in a positive manner.
as a result of this
offence, mr. e.g.-g. has stopped drinking and has focused his attention on
counselling and volunteer work. i have written confirmation that he began
full-time employment as a general labourer with canturk paving & general
contracting ltd. on 7 april 2025.
mr. e.g.-g. has been in
a committed relationship with s.u. for approximately 5 years. she describes him
as a loving and supportive partner who was completely forthcoming to her about
the grave error in judgment that he made. the two have aspirations of getting
married and starting a family.
in summary, it is clear
that the young man before me made a horrible – and inexcusable – mistake but
has done everything in his power to make amends. in this regard, i consider his
allocution in court, in which he expressed his deep remorse for betraying r.s.’
trust, to be genuine.
the victim
r.s.’ victim impact
statement vividly expressed the emotional turmoil she has suffered as a result
of mr. e.g.-g.’s actions. she advised that a least three people have approached
her because they recognized her from the videos.
r.s. feels exploited,
ashamed and frightened that her conservative family may somehow learn of her
intimate images online. she also fears that the intimate images may come to
light as she pursues her career in medicine. as a result of her anxiety, she
was forced to delay her licensing exams.
fortunately, r.s. has
been seeing a therapist and has been prescribed medication to address her
anxiety.
purpose and
principles of sentencing
section 718
cc
sets out the various objectives of sentencing as follows:
718. the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and
the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful
conduct;
(b) to deter the offender and other
persons from committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from
society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating
offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm
done to victims or to the community; and
(f) to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or
to the community.
the fundamental
principle of sentencing is proportionality. “the sentence must be severe enough
to denounce the offence but must not exceed what is just and appropriate, given
the moral blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence.”
indeed, parliament has codified this fundamental principle in
s.718.1
cc
,
which holds that, “a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
in arriving at a just
sentence for mr. e.g.-g., the principle of proportionality requires that i give
full consideration to both factors – the gravity of the offence and the moral
blameworthiness of the offender - without elevating one at the expense of the
other.
in this case, the
gravity of the offence is not seriously in dispute. where, as here, the offence
is prosecuted by summary conviction, the maximum sentence for publishing an
intimate image is two years less a day. when prosecuted by indictment, it is
five years.
justice leach
summarized the extremely serious nature of the offence as follows:
section 162.1 of the code is a
relatively new offence that was created in response to growing concerns about
violations of privacy, “cyber-bullying” and, in particular, the distribution of
intimate images in a public forum without the consent of those depicted in
them, especially in cases involving what is known in the vernacular as “revenge
porn”. it is beyond question that the non-consensual distribution of such
intimate images carries with it the risk of psychological hardship and
embarrassment to the victims of such crimes. in notorious instances, those who
have been the subject of such non-consensual publication of their intimate
images on the internet have killed themselves…
likewise, the moral
blameworthiness of mr. e.g.-g. is obvious. he deliberately betrayed the trust
of a former intimate partner in a manner that had the potential to cause
devastating, embarrassing, irreversible and entirely foreseeable consequences.
that he was intoxicated at the time somewhat attenuates his degree of
responsibility, but not appreciably so.
pursuant to
s.718.2
(b)-(e)
cc
, i must consider the principles of parity and
restraint in deciding upon a just sentence.
the principle of parity
(
s.718.2
(b)
c.c.
) directs that a sentence should be similar to sentences
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances. this is a notoriously difficult exercise, as no two cases are
exactly the same. as succinctly stated by chief justice lamer, “…the search for
a single appropriate sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will
frequently be a fruitless exercise of academic frustration.”
this point is
illustrated by the vast range of sentences handed down since the coming into
force of
s.162.1
cc
in march of 2015, from a conditional discharge
, to a
suspended sentence
,
to a conditional sentence
,
to significant periods of incarceration
.
that there is a wide
range is not surprising, as sentencing is a highly individualized exercise.
the principle of
restraint is codified in
ss.718.2
(d) and (e)
cc
, which read as follows:
718.2(d) an offender should not be
deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the
circumstances; and
(e) all available sanctions, other
than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with
the harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
sentencing
precedents for publishing intimate images
while there is a
growing body of sentencing case law relating to this offence, i have been
unable to find binding decisions from appellate courts. what all courts seem to
agree on, however, is that, for the offence of publishing an intimate image
without consent, the primary sentencing considerations are denunciation and
deterrence. i agree.
chief justice lamer
explained the principle of denunciation in the following terms:
the objective of denunciation
mandates that a sentence should also communicate society’s condemnation of that
particular offender’s conduct. in short, a sentence with a denunciatory element
represents a symbolic, collective statement that the offender’s conduct should
be punished for encroaching on our society’s basic code of values as enshrined
within our substantive criminal law… our criminal law is also a system of
values. a sentence which expresses denunciation is simply the means by which
these values are communicated. in short, in addition to attaching negative
consequences to undesirable behaviour, judicial sentences should also be
imposed in a manner which positively instills the basic set of communal values
shared by all canadians as expressed by the
criminal code
.
general deterrence is
grounded in the theory that punishment will discourage others in the community
from engaging in that particular type of crime. it is engaged either when the
crime is particularly heinous or when the crime is particularly prevalent in the
community.
as can be seen from the
growing body of sentencing case law, i have no difficulty concluding that
publishing intimate images without consent is both serious and prevalent in our
community.
in my view,
denunciation and general deterrence are particularly engaged by the very nature
of the offence. it invariably involves a devastating breach of trust where the
victim is powerless to defend herself. it is too easily committed with the
click of a button by a cowardly offender who cloaks himself in the anonymity of
the internet. the victims are disproportionately, if not exclusively, female.
having said that, the
restorative objectives of sentencing are not irrelevant in determining a just
sentence. as long as they do not overwhelm the analysis, specific deterrence,
rehabilitation and reparations to victims and the community remain important
considerations.
sentencing
decisions
r. v.
a.c., 2017 oncj no. 129
the accused pleaded
guilty to publishing intimate images and failing to comply with an undertaking.
he sent nude photos and videos (taken with the victim’s consent) to the
victim’s friends and employer through instagram. they did not depict the victim
engaged in sexual activity. the accused disseminated the items out of revenge
after warning the victim that if she did not talk to him he would do so.
the accused was 21
years old with no criminal record. he had significant support from family and
friends and displayed genuine remorse. he spent three days in pre-sentence
custody.
the crown sought a
conditional sentence order, while the defence sought a conditional discharge.
justice harris granted a conditional discharge with onerous conditions attached
to the probation order.
r. v.
a.c.,
2017 oncj 317
the accused pleaded
guilty to publishing intimate images. the accused posted nude photos of the
victim and videos of them having sex (taken with consent) on two porn websites.
the victim’s face was visible. the accused attached the victim’s full name,
city and country of birth to the files.
the accused was 32
years old with no criminal record.
the crown sought a six
month jail sentence, while the defence sought a conditional discharge. justice
rahman (as he then was) imposed a sentence of five months in jail followed by
one year probation, specifically noting the offender’s lack of insight into the
harm he had caused.
in rejecting a
suspended sentence, justice rahman cited the following passage from the
saskatchewan court of appeal in
r. v. w.b.t.
that was also referred to
by chief justice lamer
in
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 6
:
apart from the wording of the
provision, the innate character of a probation order is such that it seeks to
influence the future behaviour of the offender. more specifically, it seeks to
secure “the good conduct” of the offender and to deter him from committing
other offences. it does not particularly seek to reflect the seriousness of the
offence or the offender’s degree of culpability. nor does it particularly seek
to fill the need for denunciation of the offence or the general deterrence of
others to commit the same or other offences. depending upon the specific
conditions of the order there may well be a punitive aspect to a probation order
but punishment is not the dominant or an inherent purpose. it is perhaps not
even a secondary purpose but is more in the nature of a consequence of an
offender’s compliance with one or more of the specific conditions with which he
or she may find it hard to comply
.
r. v.
j.b.,
2018 onsc 4726
the accused pleaded
guilty to publishing intimate images. the crown proceeded by indictment. the
accused created a fake facebook profile with the victim’s name and photo and
“friended” some of the victim’s friends and family members. he attached five
intimate images of the victim (taken with her consent) to the facebook profile.
as soon as it came to the victim’s attention, the accused deactivated the
account.
the accused was 27
years old at the time of the offence and 30 at the time of sentencing. he had a
criminal record that involved convictions for serious offences and other
offences involving intimate partners.
the crown sought a one
year jail sentence. the defence sought a nine to 12 month conditional sentence.
justice leach imposed a
16 month conditional sentence followed by three years of probation. in doing
so, justice leach noted the positive path the accused was on, including his
employment, his stable relationship and his support of his wife and newborn
child: “society also obviously has an interest in avoiding the negative
long-term consequences of significantly and unnecessarily disrupting
demonstrably successful efforts at rehabilitation.”
r. v.
j.s.,
2018 oncj 82
the accused pleaded
guilty to publishing intimate images. the crown proceeded by indictment. the
accused took videos of the victim with her consent, but after she asked him to
stop, he continued to record surreptitious videos, which he posted online. the
videos he posted showed the victim’s face and depicted sexual activity. the
accused attached the victim’s full name to the videos. as well, the accused
created an escort advertisement on backpage with the victim’s image, name and
phone number. as a result, several strangers contacted the victim looking for
sexual services.
the accused was 36
years old with no criminal record. at the time of the offence, he was addicted
to methamphetamine and opiates.
justice ghosh acceded
to the joint submission for 18 months custody followed by three years probation.
apart from justice
ghosh’s thoughtful comments about the tremendous human toll associated with
this type of offence, the reasons for sentence are of limited value as they
were in response to a joint submission where the crown had proceeded by indictment.
r. v.
j.r.,
2018 oncj 851
the accused pleaded
guilty to criminal harassment, threatening and publishing intimate images. he
created backpage escort advertisements and included the victim’s name, cell
phone number and intimate images of her (taken with her consent). one such ad
had a photo of the victim engaged in explicit sexual activity.
the accused was 42
years old with no criminal record. at the time of the offences, he was addicted
to cocaine and mdma, but had since taken significant drug counselling. he also
attended for mindfulness counselling, completed anger management and took part
in volunteer work with youth.
the crown was seeking
two to three months jail on the publishing intimate image offence, consecutive
to the other sentences. the defence asked for a global conditional sentence.
justice stribopoulos imposed a jail sentence, including two months consecutive
on the publish intimate image offence.
r. v.
ha, unreported o.c.j. decision from 10 february 2023
the accused pleaded guilty
to assault and publishing intimate image. he posted ten videos of him and the
victim having sex (taken with consent) on a porn website. he attached the
victim’s name to the videos. the victim’s career as a real estate agent was
thus jeopardized as a google search of her name would lead to the videos.
the accused was between
24 and 26 years old when he committed the offences. he had no criminal record,
had a degree in engineering and had a history of stable employment. he
completed domestic abuse counselling.
the crown sought a jail
sentence of five months, while the defence sought a conditional sentence.
justice caponecchia imposed a five month jail sentence.
r. v.
mikhail,
o.j. no. 4420 (ocj)
the accused pleaded
guilty to three counts of voyeurism (three different victims) and one count of
publishing intimate image (involving a former intimate partner). facts relating
to five other victims of his voyeurism were read in. the crown proceeded by
indictment. the accused had taken surreptitious photos of him and the victim
having sex and posted them on a porn website under his account name.
the accused was 30
years old with no criminal record. he completed counselling for sex addiction
and completed a cognitive behaviour therapy program.
the crown sought an 18
month jail sentence. the defence sought a conditional discharge. justice
fiorucci j imposed a 10 month jail sentence.
r. v.
adubufuor,
2023 oncj 477
the accused was found
guilty after trial of mischief and publish intimate image. he sent a video of
the victim performing fellatio on him to the victim’s new boyfriend.
the accused was 31
years old with no criminal record.
the crown sought a
three to four month jail sentence, while the defence sought a conditional
sentence. justice wendl imposed a four month jail sentence.
r. v.
boucetta,
2024 onsc 1046
the accused pleaded
guilty to voyeurism and publish intimate image. the crown proceeded by
indictment. the accused had recorded a video of the victim and him having sex
(without her knowledge) and sent the video to the accused’s friend on snapchat.
the videos showed both of their genitalia and the accused’s face. the victim’s
face was not shown but she was identifiable to other partygoers where the
sexual activity occurred because of the costume she had been wearing. the
victim’s name was not tagged on the video.
the accused was 21
years old with no criminal record. following his arrest, he switched
universities and took courses on gender violence and consent. he also took
counselling sessions for sexual offending.
the crown sought a 12
to 18 month jail sentence, while the defence sought a conditional sentence in
the range of 18 months to two years less a day. justice moore sentenced the
accused to a conditional sentence of two years less a day, followed by two
years probation.
r. v.
s.f.,
2024 oncj 313
the accused was
convicted after trial of publishing intimate images. the accused uploaded two
videos of the victim and him having sex (taken on consent) to a porn website.
the accused did not tag the victim’s name, nor was the victim clearly visible or
easily recognizable.
the accused was 21
years old when he committed the offence and had no criminal record. he had full
time employment and was applying to a masters program. he had completed
psychotherapy at to separate treatment programs. as well, the accused had
completed many community service hours.
the crown sought five
months jail, while the defence advocated for a conditional discharge. justice
nadel imposed a suspended sentence with 14 months probation.
r. v.
labreche,
2024 abcj 246
the accused was
convicted after trial of publishing intimate images. the accused posted
intimate photos of the victim (taken on consent) and one taken surreptitiously
on the internet.
the accused was 26
years old with no criminal record. he was of metis background. his
gladue
report outlined physical abuse he suffered growing up. he was recently
diagnosed with autism and schizophreniform disorder. he was followed by a
mental health professional.
the crown sought five
months jail, while the defence sought a suspended sentence and probation.
justice stevenson sentenced the accused to 90 days jail, to be served
intermittently.
r. v.
r.b.,
2025 mbpc 7
the accused was
convicted after trial of publishing intimate images. he uploaded videos of
explicit sexual activity between him and the victim to his account on a porn
website. his account had 18 friends and seven subscribers. one video had been
viewed 1,200 times. the videos were not otherwise available to the public at
large. some videos showed vaginal intercourse with a pregnant female but
neither the victim’s face nor the accused’s face were visible. the victim was
able to identify herself by her manicured nails, rings and pregnant figure. two
other videos showed the victim’s face as she was performing fellatio. the accused
added tags to the videos with a colloquial version of the victim’s name.
the accused was a
36-year-old indigenous male with no criminal record. he was gainfully employed.
the sentencing judge found him to be unapologetic and unremorseful.
the sentences sought by
the crown and defence are not clear from the judgment. however, it is clear
that justice hewitt-michta did not believe that a conditional sentence would
adequately satisfy the objectives and principles of sentencing. a nine month jail
sentence followed by two years probation was imposed
aggravating
and mitigating factors
in determining a just
sentence, i must take into account all relevant aggravating factors (including
the statutory aggravating factors in
s.718.2
(a)
c.c
.) and mitigating
factors relating to the offence and the offender.
i find the following
aggravating factors to be present in this case:
(1)
mr. e.g.-g.’s actions
amounted to abuse of a former intimate partner, a statutory aggravating factor
under
s.718.2
(a)(ii)
cc
;
(2)
in committing the
offence, mr. e.g.-g. abused a position of trust in relation to r.s., a
statutory aggravating factor under
s.718.2
(a)(iii)
cc
;
(3)
mr. e.g.-g.’s actions
had and continue to have a significant impact on r.s., a statutory aggravating
factor under
s.718.2
(a)(iii.1)
cc
;
(4)
the material posted by mr.
e.g.-g. included photos and videos, including r.s. engaged in explicit sexual
activity;
(5)
r.s.’ face and
identifiable tattoos were visible in the photos and videos;
(6)
even though mr. e.g.-g.
was intoxicated when he posted the files to reddit, he certainly had time
thereafter to come to his senses and delete them but, for some reason, did not.
a number of seriously
aggravating factors that appear in many of the cases i reviewed are
not
present in this case. they are in no way mitigating, but rather represent the
absence of seriously aggravating factors, including;
(1)
mr. e.g.-g.’s offence
was not accompanied by any other offences such as voyeurism, extortion or
criminal harassment;
(2)
the photos and videos
were not recorded surreptitiously by mr. e.g.-g., but rather with the consent
of r.s.. to be clear, though, he was well aware that r.s.’ consent did not
extend to dissemination;
(3)
mr. e.g.-g. did not tag
r.s.’s name or phone number on any of the photos or videos. in other words, a
google search of r.s.’ name would not lead to discovery of the intimate
material. in order to access the photos and videos, a member of the public
would have to log onto reddit and look in the “girls of toronto” and “brown
hotties” forums;
(4)
there is no evidence
before me that any of the intimate images and videos remain anywhere on the
internet;
(5)
this is not a case of
“revenge porn” in which mr. e.g.-g. deliberately sought to harm r.s. or to
exact retribution for some perceived wrongdoing; and
(6)
mr. e.g.-g. did not
specifically send the photos and videos to friends, family members and
co-workers of r.s. in an effort to humiliate her.
there are numerous
mitigating factors, including:
(1)
mr. e.g.-g. was
relatively young, 27 years old, when he committed the offence. he is now 29
years old;
(2)
mr. e.g.-g. has no
criminal record. it appears that he has never been in trouble either before or
after this terrible lapse in judgment;
(3)
mr. e.g.-g. has
significant support among his family members and other members of the
community;
(4)
from the letters that
have been filed on mr. e.g.-g.’s behalf, it is clear that he was completely
upfront about his wrongdoing with his family, friends and girlfriend. this is a
strong indication that he has true insight into the wrongfulness of his
actions;
(5)
mr. e.g.-g. has a
history of stable employment, including full-time work with canturk paving
& general contracting ltd. commencing 7 april 2025;
(6)
mr. e.g.-g. has
successfully completed extensive counselling regarding sexual boundaries;
(7)
mr. e.g.-g. completed
100.25 hours of community service with yonge street mission;
(8)
mr. e.g.-g.’s psr can
only be described as glowing. he was cooperative and forthcoming during the
process;
(9)
since his arrest, mr.
e.g.-g. is on the right path with his life. he has full-time employment and is
in a serious, loving relationship with marriage on the horizon;
(10)
the statement prepared
and read out by mr. e.g.-g. in court demonstrated his genuine remorse. this
finds corroboration in the psr and the numerous character letters filed on his
behalf;
(11)
mr. e.g.-g.’s genuine
remorse is further demonstrated by his guilty plea. he spared r.s. from having
to testify about what would have clearly been difficult subject matter. it is
especially significant that he chose to give up his right to a trial and to
plead guilty when he knew that the crown was seeking jail and must have been
advised that the vast majority of the case law supports the crown’s position.
analysis
notwithstanding the
fact that mr. e.g.-g. is a first time, somewhat youthful offender, i have
determined that a conditional discharge would not be appropriate. the gravity
of the offence, including the trauma it has caused r.s., and mr. e.g.-g.’s high
level of moral blameworthiness combine to render a conditional discharge
contrary to the public interest.
simply put, the
principle of proportionality on sentence on the facts before me calls for the
imposition of a criminal conviction and a resulting criminal record.
in terms of parity, the
crown’s request for four months custody is certainly within the range and would
certainly address the applicable objectives and principles of sentencing.
however, having
considered all aggravating and mitigating factors in this case, including the
absence of many of the seriously aggravating factors present in other cases, i
find that incarcerating mr. e.g.-g. would be inconsistent with the principle of
restraint.
on the particular facts
before me, i cannot conclude that denunciation and general deterrence can
only
be addressed by incarceration in a jail or even in the community.
again, the gravity of
the offence committed by mr. e.g.-g. and his degree of responsibility do
require the imposition of a criminal conviction.
i find the facts to be
most similar to those present
in
r. v. s.f
.
,
2024 oncj 313
, other than
the fact that mr. e.g.-g. pleaded guilty whereas s.f. did not. in both cases,
the intimate videos were posted by the accused without the victim’s name
tagged. rather, an acquaintance happened to stumble across the videos and
recognize the victim. in both cases, the accused did not post the videos for vengeful
or extortive purposes.
the imposition of a
criminal conviction, particularly for a youthful first offender with his whole
life ahead of him, has both denunciatory and general deterrent value. a
criminal record has far-reaching consequences, including significant
impediments to employment, volunteer work and travel.
i have come to the
conclusion that a fit and proper sentence on the particular facts of this case
is a suspended sentence and 18 months probation. not only does this sentence
address the primary sentencing objectives of denunciation and general
deterrence, but it is also consistent with other important sentencing
principles of specific deterrence, rehabilitation and restraint.
in light of the
aggravating and mitigating factors present in this case, a suspended sentence
with sufficiently restrictive probationary conditions strikes the appropriate
balance between a punitive and restorative sentence.
with respect to the dna
order requested by the crown, i note that publishing intimate images (
s.162.1
cc
)
is neither a primary designated offence nor a secondary designated offence.
accordingly, i do not have jurisdiction to make such an order.
the crown also requests
a
soira
order. pursuant to
s.490.011(1)
cc
, publishing intimate
images is a “primary offence.” as neither s.490.012(1) nor (2)
cc
apply,
the crown relies on
s.490.012(3)
cc
as the basis for his request.
i am satisfied that mr.
e.g.-g. has established that there would be no connection between making the
order and the purpose of helping police services prevent or investigate crimes
of a sexual nature by requiring the registration of information relating to sex
offenders under that
act
[
s.490.012(3)
(a)
cc
].
consequently, i decline
to make a
soira
order.
sentence
mr. e.g.-g., i suspend
the passing of sentence and place you on probation for 18 months with the
following conditions:
1.
report by telephone to
your probation officer by the end of business on monday, 14 april 2025 and
after that, at all times and places as directed by the probation officer or any
person authorized by a probation officer to assist in your supervision.
2.
live at a place
approved of by the probation officer and do not change that address without
obtaining the consent of the probation officer in advance.
3.
for the first four
months of this order, remain in your residence or on the property of your
residence between the hours of 10:00 pm and 5:00 am, except
•
for any medical emergency
involving you or any member of your immediate family; or
•
with the prior written
permission of your probation officer
4.
do not contact or
communicate in any way, either directly or indirectly, by any physical,
electronic or other means with r.s. or any member of her immediate family.
5.
do not be within 100
metres of any place where you know r.s. or any member of her immediate family
to live, work, worship, go to school, frequent or any place you know them to be
except
•
for required court
attendances.
6.
attend and actively
participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative programs as
directed by the probation officer and complete them to the satisfaction of the
probation officer.
7.
you shall sign any
release of information forms as will enable your probation officer to monitor
your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
8.
you shall provide proof
of your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
9.
perform 49.75 hours of
community service work on a rate and schedule to be directed by the probation
officer but must be completed within 12 months of the start date to this order.
10.
make reasonable efforts
to seek and maintain suitable work and provide proof of same as required by the
probation officer.
11.
you are not to possess,
including in the “cloud”, any intimate images (as defined by section 162.1(2)
cc
)
of any person who is known to you personally, including r.s.. you have until
the end of business on monday, 14 april 2025 to dispose of any such images in
your possession.
12.
you are to allow your
probation officer access to your social media accounts upon request. if
directed by your probation officer, you are to install and activate, at your
own expense, any program that will enable your probation officer remote access.
finally, you are
afforded four months to pay the victim fine surcharge.
released:  11 april
2025
justice r.m. robinson
r. v. bissonnette
,
2022 scc 23
,
at para
50
.
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no.
6
, at paras
82-83
;
r. v. ipelee,
2012 scc 13 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 13
, at para
37
.
r. v. j.b.
,
2018 onsc 4726
, at para
20
.
r. v. c.a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc)
,
s.c.j. no.
28
, at para
92
.
r. v. a.c.
,
2017 oncj 129
;
r. v. c.s
.
,
2024 onsc 5528
.
r. v. s.f
.
,
2024 oncj 313
.
r. v. j.b
.
,
2018 onsc 4726
;
r. v. boucetta
,
2024 onsc 1046
.
r. v. j.s.
,
2018 oncj 82
;
r.
v. mikhail
,
o.j. no. 4420 (o.c.j.)
;
r. v. r.b.,
2025 mbpc 7
.
r. v. c.a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc)
,
s.c.j. no.
28
, at para
81
.
r. v. foianesi
,
2011 mbca 33
, at paras
12-13
.
r. v. w.b.t
.,
s.j. no. 826
, at para 30
.
r. v. j.b.
, supra
,
at para
77
.