ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. smith
, 2025 oncj 646
date:
2025 12 09
court
file no:  oshawa 25-28104161
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
elijah smith
before
justice joseph hanna
heard
on november 3 & 5, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 9, 2025
b. hart
.................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
d. heath
……………………………………………………………..counsel
for the accused
hanna j.:
introduction
elijah smith discharged a single round from a
handgun in the direction of patrons who had followed him outside of a restaurant.
as a result of this event, he is charged with
the following
criminal code
offences:
1.
intentionally discharging a firearm into or at a
place knowing or being reckless as to whether another person was present in
that place, contrary to s. 244.2(1)(a);
2.
carrying a concealed weapon, contrary to s.
90(1);
3.
carrying a weapon for a purpose dangerous to the
public peace, contrary to s. 88(1); and
4.
unauthorized possession of a loaded firearm,
namely a handgun, contrary to s. 95(1).
the crown’s case consisted of an agreed
statement of facts, scene of crime photographs, and three video clips. mr.
smith’s testified in his own defence.
the defence made no submissions in response to counts
2 – 4. with respect to count 1, the main issue i need to decide is whether the
crown has disproven self-defence beyond a reasonable doubt.
the onus of proof and w.d. in the
context of a self-defence case
mr. smith is presumed innocent. it is the
crown’s onus to prove his guilt of the offences charged beyond a reasonable
doubt. it is not enough that the crown prove that mr. smith is probably guilty.
while proof to an absolute certainty is not required, proof beyond a reasonable
doubt falls much closer to an absolute certainty than to proof on a balance of
probabilities. a reasonable doubt can arise from the evidence or from the
absence of evidence.
given that mr. smith claims he acted in
self-defence, it is appropriate to apply a modified
w.d.
analysis to
properly consider the objective and subjective components of lawful
self-defence:
r. v. reid
,
2003 canlii 14779
(onca) at para.
72
;
r. v.
brown
,
2020 onca 462
, at para.
47
.
first, if i accept mr. smith’s evidence and, on
the basis of it, i believe or have a reasonable doubt that he was acting in
self-defence, i will find mr. smith not guilty on count 1.
second, even if i do not accept mr. smith’s
evidence, if, after considering it alone or in conjunction with the other
evidence, i believe or have a reasonable doubt that he was acting in lawful
self-defence, i will find mr. smith not guilty on count 1.
third, even if the unaccepted evidence does not
raise a reasonable doubt, the crown still bears the burden of proving that mr.
smith was not acting in lawful defence beyond a reasonable doubt based upon the
whole of the accepted evidence:
r. v. martin
,
2020 onsc 4779
at para.
8
;
r. v. berman
,
2024 onsc 3304
at paras.
44–45
;
brown
,
2020 onca
462
, at paras.
45 -55
.
in assessing the accused’s evidence, i must do
so by considering it in the context of all the evidence led at trial, including
the crown’s evidence:
r. v. hull
,
2006 canlii 26572 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3177 at para.
5
;
r
. v. hoohing
,
2007 onca 577
at para.
15
the video evidence and the agreed
facts
on june 29, 2024, mr. smith attended the mansion
kitchen and bar located at 1294 kingston road, in pickering. what follows is a review
of the video evidence, the forensic investigation conducted, and other facts
agreed to by the parties.
the interior video
the interior video depicts mr. smith near the
bar area of the restaurant between 00:35:17 and 00:36:05. during this time, he
appears to have had a brief interaction with two males. mr. smith was wearing
dark clothing, a medical mask positioned below his mouth, and carrying a
satchel with a red strap. one of the males was wearing a grey jacket, and the
other was wearing a blue t-shirt and a cap.
at 00:35:17, mr. smith was positioned
approximately one to two feet from the male wearing the grey jacket. that male
nodded and appeared to be speaking.
at 00:35:18, mr. smith took a step back from the
male in the grey jacket. between 00:35:18 and 00:35:30, the male in the grey
jacket spoke with the male in the blue shirt, while mr. smith walked behind them
and moved to the side of the bar.
between 00:35:30 and 00:35:42, mr. smith was at
the side of the bar interacting with another individual. during this time, the
male in the grey jacket and the male in the blue shirt continued to interact.
at 00:35:46, mr. smith approached the left side
of the male in the blue t-shirt, who was looking at his phone. the male in the
grey jacket was positioned to that male’s right. at this point, both males had
their backs to the camera. at 00:35:47, the male in the blue shirt lifted his
head to look at mr. smith, then quickly turned his attention back to his phone
within two seconds. by 00:35:50, mr. smith had turned his back to both males.
between 00:35:47 and 00:35:52, the male in the grey jacket was approximately
six feet away from mr. smith and nodded his head.
between 00:35:53 and 00:36:02, the male in the
blue shirt approached a male who appeared to be an employee of the
establishment and interacted with him. the male in the grey jacket interacted
with a woman. mr. smith walked behind the male in the grey jacket and stood a
few feet behind him. mr. smith and the male in the grey jacket remained in this
position until 00:36:05, at which point the video clip ended.
the entry video
the
entrance to the establishment consists of a single glass door leading from the
restaurant into a small vestibule area, followed by two additional glass doors
that open onto a porch and a set of stairs outside. the entry video clip is 32
seconds long.
at
00:52:50, mr. smith opened the door from the restaurant and entered the
vestibule. he was followed by the male in the grey jacket, and then by the male
in the blue shirt. at 00:52:51, mr. smith reached the double glass doors. at
that point, the male in the grey jacket had begun opening the single glass door
from the restaurant.
between
00:52:52 and 00:52:54, mr. smith opened one of the double glass doors and
exited onto the porch. at 00:52:54, the male in the grey jacket stood inside
the vestibule, directly in front of the double glass doors. at the same time,
the male in the blue shirt entered the vestibule from the restaurant.
at
00:52:55, the male in the grey jacket stood in the doorway of the double glass
doors, holding one of the doors open. the male in the blue shirt was holding
the single glass door to enter the vestibule. mr. smith had walked down the
stairs and was no longer visible on camera.
between
00:52:55 and 00:53:01, the male in the grey jacket stood on the porch at the
top of the stairs, holding one of the glass doors with his left hand. he
appeared to gesture toward himself approximately five times with his right
hand. his left hand then released the door as the male in the blue shirt walked
through the doorway.
at
00:53:02, the male in the grey jacket was standing at the top of the stairs.
the male in the blue shirt stood behind him, holding one of the double glass
doors with his left hand. his right hand was down by his side, a few inches
from his body. a cellphone holster was visible on his right hip. he was not
holding anything in either of his hands.
still
at 00:53:02, the male in the blue shirt released the door and stepped closer to
the male in the grey jacket. at that moment, the glass door directly behind
both males shattered from a gunshot.
at
00:53:03, the male in the blue shirt entered through the undamaged glass door,
which had not yet fully closed. he was crouched down at the time. he and the
male in the grey jacket then ran through the vestibule and back into the
restaurant, arriving there by 00:53:06. as they entered through the single
glass door, the video shows that it also had been shattered by the gunshot.
exterior video
the exterior video shows that between 00:52:55 and 00:52:56, mr. smith
walked from the porch down the steps. six individuals were standing at the
bottom of the steps at that time. upon reaching the ground, mr. smith walked
approximately six paces and turned to face the entrance of the establishment at
00:52:58.
at
00:53:02, mr. smith retrieved a handgun and pointed it in the direction of the
establishment’s entrance. at 00:53:03, smoke or a flash is visible coming from
the handgun, and the individuals near the stairs began to scatter. mr. smith
also began to run away.
by
00:53:06, mr. smith was no longer visible on camera. the individuals who had
scattered returned to the staircase. the video ends at 00:53:17.
police investigation
scene
of crime photographs demonstrate that there are six steps from ground level to
the porch outside the entrance to the mansion kitchen + bar. police recovered a
.45 calibre shell casing near the location of the discharge.
the
projectile fired by mr. smith passed through both glass entry doors, struck the
interior of the restaurant, and came to rest on the interior stairs. at the
time of the shooting, there were patrons inside the restaurant.
police
investigation revealed that mr. smith had purchased two shots of hennessy using
his rbc credit card.
the
two males who followed mr. smith outside fled immediately after the shot was
fired. police were unable to locate or identify them.
police
investigation further revealed that in 2021, mr. smith had been the victim of a
“discharge firearm with intent incident”. he was dropped off at a hospital with
a gunshot wound to his leg.
mr. smith’s evidence
mr.
smith testified that he attended the mansion kitchen and bar to conduct a drug
deal. he acknowledged that he brought a gun with him, which was in his satchel.
he
explained that he carried a gun for protection because he had been traumatized
after being shot in 2021 in a case of mistaken identity and because he was
involved in selling drugs. he stated that everyone in that business carried a
gun. he said he was fearful that something could happen during the meeting and,
more generally.
he
described his recovery process following the shooting and indicated that as of
june 2024 he still had mobility difficulties.
regarding
his first interaction with the two males depicted on the interior video, mr.
smith testified that one of them asked if he remembered him and said he looked
familiar. mr. smith responded that the person must be mistaken. he said one of
the males said something further to him, but he disregarded it. he then went to
the bar to get his bill, stating that he felt there was obvious tension. he
advised that the males were “mean mugging him,” meaning they were giving him
menacing looks. he said the interaction triggered a panic attack and that he
wanted to leave as quickly as possible. he agreed in cross-examination that he
did not leave for more than 10 minutes after receiving his bill. he explained
that he did not want to leave right away because he was concerned the males
would follow him, which is what ended up happening. he stated that he had no
further interactions with the males until he was leaving.
he
described a second interaction with the two males as he was leaving, which
occurred outside the establishment.
mr.
smith testified that he entered a crowd of people and was heading to his car. he
said the male in the grey jacket asked him where he was going and whether he
remembered him. mr. smith responded that he neither remembered nor knew the
males. he said things became heated at that point and that both males were
conversing with him as he walked away. when shown the entry video depicting the
male in the grey jacket near the entrance doors, mr. smith testified that this
male was repeatedly asking if he remembered him, pointing aggressively, and
raising his voice. mr. smith said he responded that he did not remember him.
mr.
smith testified that he was panicking and having a panic attack. he said the
male in the grey jacket had something on his waist. in cross-examination, he
mentioned that he observed a bulge by the male’s waist and that the male was
grabbing for something. he also added that the male, or they, said “i have it”
or “they have it”, which he explained was a street term. that was when he
believed they had a gun. around the same time, he said he observed the male in
the blue shirt come through the door, quickly and aggressively. he stated that
it appeared as though this male had a gun or something in his hand. he said the
interaction was quick, so he did not clearly see, but it looked to him as
though the male had something in his hand when he rushed out behind the male in
the grey jacket. mr. smith maintained that he believed the male in the blue
shirt had a gun. in cross-examination, he indicated that his view was
obstructed by the male in the grey jacket. he also said it appeared to him that
the male in the blue shirt was reaching for something.
mr.
smith explained that he fired his gun because he did not want to get shot. he
indicated this was to defend himself and that he did not believe he had an
alternative. he emphasized that he had previously been the victim of gun
violence.
he
indicated that he did not know what the two males’ motive was in antagonizing
him.
assessment of mr. smith’s credibility and
reliability
there
were several problems with mr. smith’s evidence that adversely affected my
assessment of his credibility and reliability.
first,
while in possession of a loaded firearm, mr. smith implausibly claimed that he
experienced a panic attack in response to a brief and relatively innocuous
encounter with strangers.
second,
although mr. smith claimed he was in a state of panic and wished to leave the
establishment as quickly as possible, his actions were inconsistent with that
assertion. he remained at the location for over ten minutes after receiving his
bill, which undermines the credibility of his claim that he was urgently trying
to exit due to panic.
third,
mr. smith’s testimony that the individual in the grey jacket had a bulge near
his waist is not credible. i am not concerned by the difference between his
evidence in chief, where he said the male had something at his waist, and his
evidence in cross
‑
examination,
where he referred to a bulge. i do not consider this to be a significant
inconsistency. i reject his evidence on this point for other reasons. a review of
the video evidence—examined closely and even zoomed in—reveals no such bulge.
furthermore, the individual was wearing a loose black shirt, making it
implausible that mr. smith could have observed any concealed object.
fourth,
mr. smith’s testimony during cross-examination that the male in the grey shirt
told him either he or they “had it” while standing on the porch of the
establishment was neither reliable nor credible. he failed to mention this
alleged statement during his examination-in-chief, despite later presenting it
as a significant reason for believing the two males were armed. his explanation
for this omission was not that he simply forgot to mention it, but that his
memory was “foggy”, and he only recalled the detail upon viewing the video in court.
this explanation lacked credibility, and i do not accept this aspect of his
testimony as reliable.
fifth,
mr. smith’s claim that he believed he observed a firearm in the person in the
blue shirt’s hand was problematic for two reasons. first, the video evidence
clearly establishes that there was no item in this person’s hand. second, when
testifying about this subject mr. smith acknowledged that he did not have a
clear view and that the person in the grey jacket was partially blocking his
line of sight. it is patently unbelievable that mr. smith saw what was not
there and what was obscured. at most, mr. smith may have had a speculative and
paranoid fear of a firearm.
sixth,
mr. smith’s description of the actions of the male in the blue shirt as he exited
the door is inconsistent with the video evidence. mr. smith claimed that the
male came out quickly and aggressively and that he believed this male reached
for something. the entry video, however, shows the male in the blue shirt
walking through the door at a normal pace, making no aggressive gestures, and
not reaching for anything.
seventh,
mr. smith testified that his intention upon exiting the establishment was to go
to his vehicle. however, his explanation—that he did not continue because he
feared the two males would follow him—was not credible. upon reaching the
bottom of the stairs, he took six paces before turning to face the two males
who, according to him, had triggered a panic attack during their initial
interaction. these individuals made no attempt to descend the stairs. had mr.
smith continued walking and had they pursued him, his explanation might have
had some plausibility. but that is not what occurred.
overall,
i do not find mr. smith to be a credible or reliable witness. as i will elaborate,
his evidence does not cause me to believe he acted in self
‑
defence, nor does it
leave me with, or contribute to, a reasonable doubt on that issue.
the law
of self-defence
there are three essential elements to the
defence of use of force: (1) the accused must have reasonably apprehended a
threat of harm to himself (the catalyst); (2) the force used by the accused was
in response to the perceived threat or harm (the motive); and (3) the force
used was reasonable in the circumstances (the response):
criminal code, section
34
;
r. v. khill
,
2021 scc 37
, at paras.
51-52
, 59, 62;
r. v.
suthakaran
,
2024 onca 50
, at para.
20
. the reasonableness of the response
is to be assessed having regard to the non-exhaustive list of factors in
section 34 subsection (2).
the catalyst focuses on the accused's state of
mind and asks whether the accused subjectively believed on objectively
reasonable grounds that force was being used or threatened against them or
another person. the motive asks whether the accused did something for the
subjective purpose of defending or protecting themself or another. the response
asks whether the conduct of the accused was reasonable in the circumstances,
again having regard to the non-exhaustive list of factors in section 34
subsection (2).
assessment of self-defence in
this case
the catalyst
mr.
smith testified that he feared for his life prior to discharging his firearm.
i
do not accept mr. smith’s evidence, nor do i have a reasonable doubt, that he
reasonably apprehended harm to himself.
the
interaction in the interior bar area was brief and relatively innocuous. i
reject mr. smith’s assertion that it triggered a panic attack. his claim that
he wanted to leave immediately is contradicted by his decision to remain for
more than 10 minutes. there is no evidence that either of the two males he
interacted with touched him, threatened him, or displayed any weapons during
this initial encounter.
as
for the interaction outside, i begin by noting that mr. smith was positioned 10
to 15 feet away from the two males when he fired his weapon, and that neither
male made any attempt to descend the stairs.
for
the reasons previously stated, i reject mr. smith’s claim that he observed a
bulge at the waist of the male in the grey jacket. i also reject his assertion
that anyone said, “i have it” or “they have it”. even if i were to accept that
he observed a bulge—which i do not—he never indicated that he saw a firearm on
the individual’s waist, let alone in his hand. nor did he mention the male
lifting his shirt to display any item. the video shows the male in the grey
jacket merely lowering his hand momentarily in front of his body before raising
it again, with nothing in it, just prior to the glass shattering. even had mr.
smith perceived a bulge, which again i reject, there would still be no
reasonable basis for him to believe the man was armed and about to use a
firearm against him.
the
video evidence clearly shows that the male in the blue shirt was not holding a
firearm or any other object in his hands prior to mr. smith firing his weapon. furthermore,
this male did not make any aggressive gestures towards mr. smith, nor did he
reach for anything.
i
have considered that mr. smith was previously shot and that this experience had
a significant impact on his life. i have also considered that the male in the
blue shirt wore a cell phone holster on his waist, and that his hand was
positioned a few inches from it prior to the shooting.
in
khill
, the court
stated at para. 56:
reasonableness is not considered through the eyes of
individuals who are overly fearful, intoxicated, abnormally vigilant or members
of criminal subcultures (reilly v. the queen,
1984 canlii 83 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 396, at p. 405;
cinous
, at paras. 129–30;
r. v. phillips
,
2017 onca
752
, 355 c.c.c. (3d) 141, at para.
98
)…
the question is not what the accused personally thought
was reasonable based on their characteristics and experiences, but rather what
a reasonable person with those relevant characteristics and experiences would
perceive (
pilon
,
at para. 74). the law also recognizes that an honest but mistaken belief can
still be reasonable and does not automatically preclude a claim of self-defence
(
lavallee
, at p.
874;
pétel
, at p.
13;
r. v. billing
,
2019 bcca 237
, 379 c.c.c. (3d) 285, at para.
9
;
r. v. robinson
,
2019 abqb 889
, at para.
23
(canlii);
r. v. cunha
,
2016 onca 491
, 337 c.c.c. (3d) 7, at para.
8
).
see also:
r. v. younus
,
2022 onsc 2078
, at para.
119
.
i
do not accept, nor do i have a reasonable doubt, that mr. smith perceived a
firearm in the hand of the male in the blue shirt. at most, mr. smith may have
experienced an irrational paranoia that the individual might be armed, but any
such impression was not reasonably grounded. even if mr. smith worried that the
individual might possess a firearm, that concern was not reasonable given the
circumstances.
having
carefully considered mr. smith’s testimony in the context of all the evidence,
i find that he did not reasonably apprehend harm when he discharged his
firearm. nor do i have any reasonable doubt on this issue. his evidence, viewed
alongside the other evidence, does not leave me in a reasonable doubt. based on
the evidence i accept—namely, the agreed statement of facts, the video
recordings, and the photographs—i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
mr. smith did not believe, on reasonable grounds, that force was being used
against him or that a threat of force was being made at the time he fired his
gun.
in coming to this conclusion, i have been
mindful that reviewing video evidence carries the risk of creating a misleading
impression of how events were perceived in real time by those present. see:
r.
v. e.j
.,
2025 onsc 6016
, at para.
82
. in the circumstances of this case,
the sequence of events does not support an inference that mr. smith reasonably
apprehended harm.
the crown has disproven the first element of
self-defence beyond a reasonable doubt. the defence therefore fails:
r. v.
hebert
,
1996 canlii 202 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 272, at para.
25
;
khill
, at para.
231
.
the motive
given my finding on the catalyst element of the
defence of use of force, i need not address whether mr. smith fired his firearm
for the subjective purpose of defending or protecting himself. the crown
submits that mr. smith’s motive was solely to harm the individuals he fired
toward. i need not determine this. it is sufficient to note that, even if mr.
smith had a subjectively defensive motive for firing his gun, it was based on
an irrational and unreasonable fear.
the response
the
final element of self‑defence concerns whether the accused’s conduct was
reasonable in the circumstances. the starting point is that reasonableness is
measured against “the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties
and the act”:
khill
,
at para.
64
).
while
factors relating to the accused are relevant, the focus remains on what a
reasonable person would have done in comparable circumstances, not on what the
particular accused thought at the time:
khill
, at para.
65
.
in
assessing whether mr. smith’s conduct was reasonable, i must consider the non‑exhaustive
list of factors set out in s. 34(2)(a)–(h) of the
criminal code
.
in
weighing these factors, i have assessed mr. smith’s evidence in accordance with
the modified
w.(d.)
approach outlined above. i have also adopted a holistic approach as directed in
khill
.
see:
r. v. alphonse
,
2024 bcsc
572
, at para.
237
. my earlier analysis of the catalyst element, together with my
related findings of fact, naturally informs my analysis of the response
element. i will not repeat those reasons, but rather apply my findings of fact
in assessing the factors relevant to the response element.
(a) the nature of the
force or threat
as i have explained, there was no force used against mr. smith, nor was
there any threat of force.
(b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent
and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of
force
there
was no imminent use of force, given that there was neither force nor any threat
of force. furthermore, mr. smith could have easily walked away. neither the
male in the blue shirt nor the male in the grey jacket descended the stairs
toward him.
(c) the person’s role in the incident
in
assessing this factor, the court must evaluate how the accused’s role impacts
the “equities of the situation” and the extent to which the accused bears
responsibility for the confrontation:
khill
, at paras.
85–86
. “society
is more likely to view the accused's ultimate act as wrongful or inexcusable
where their conduct was rash, reckless, negligent or unreasonable”:
khill
,
at para.
105
.
the
two males followed mr. smith as he left the establishment, though neither one
of them descended the stairs from the porch. mr. smith brought a loaded firearm
to a busy establishment. he brandished it and fired it without reasonable
grounds to believe that force or a threat of force was being used against him.
(d) whether any party to the incident used or
threatened to use a weapon
mr.
smith was the only person involved in the incident who possessed or used a
weapon.
(e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities
of the parties to the incident
the
parties were all male and appeared similarly aged. there were two males
interacting with mr. smith, and both appeared to have a larger build than him.
(f) the nature, duration and history of any
relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or
threat of force and the nature of that force or threat, and (f.1) any history
of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident
the
only evidence of prior interaction between the parties is the brief exchange
captured on the interior video and described by mr. smith. this interaction did
not involve any violence or threats of violence. at its highest, mr. smith
described receiving menacing looks from the males and them mistaking him for
someone else.
(g) the nature and proportionality of the person’s
response to the use or threat of force
mr.
smith firing a gun toward two men and into an occupied establishment was
manifestly disproportionate in the circumstances, given that no force was used
against him and there was no reasonable basis for him to fear that it would be.
(h) whether the act committed was in response to a
use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful
this
factor is not relevant to this case.
balancing the various factors
having
considered all of the factors together in a holistic manner, i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. smith’s conduct was unreasonable in the circumstances.
accordingly, the crown has also disproven this element of self-defence beyond a
reasonable doubt.
conclusion
i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
mr. smith intentionally discharged a firearm into or at a place, knowing or
being reckless as to whether another person was present. the evidence in
support of this charge is overwhelming. the only issue raised at trial in
relation to this count was self
‑
defence. for the reasons given, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defence has been disproven.
the firearm carried by mr. smith is, by
definition, a weapon. he clearly intended to conceal it in his satchel. furthermore,
mr. smith admitted he carried a loaded firearm for two purposes: to have it
available while conducting a drug deal and to protect himself based on a
generalized fear rather than an imminent threat. these purposes were obviously
dangerous to the public peace. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
counts 2 and 3, the charges of carrying a concealed weapon and possessing a
weapon dangerous to the public peace, have been proven.
mr. smith acknowledged that he was in possession
of a prohibited firearm. the defence conceded that he did not have
authorization to possess the gun. the only reasonable inference is that he was
aware the gun he carried and chose to fire was loaded. consequently, the crown
has also established count 4, possession of a loaded prohibited firearm, beyond
a reasonable doubt.
the crown has proven the essential elements of
each offence charged beyond a reasonable doubt. i therefore find mr. smith
guilty on all counts.
released:  december 9, 2025
signed:
justice joseph hanna