ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. young
, 2025 oncj 481
date:  2025 09 18
court file no.:  windsor
22-11090
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jeffrey young
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on
29
november 2023,
16, 30 january;
2, 6-9, 12-14, 20 february; 25-28 march, 1, 8 august
8 november, 2
december 2024,
8, 9 january, 5,
12, 26 march, 2 april, 7, 9 july 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 18 september 2025
delia greco and elizabeth brown................................................... counsel
for the crown
julie santarossa..........................................................................
counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:
table
of contents
introduction
.
3
the law
..
4
admissions
.
7
the evidence
.
7
j.s.
8
j.p.
29
a.l.
38
a.r.
44
s.d.
54
extrinsic witnesses
.
62
e.s.
63
c.m.
69
the expert’s report
77
the defendant’s
evidence
.
80
the result
82
introduction
in
2010, the defendant jeffrey young began working as a registered massage
therapist.  he held that designation until the end of 2019.  after that, he
worked as an unregistered masseur out of his house.  this trial involves
complaints made by several of his former clients, both from the clinic where he
worked and from his home operation.  over the course of this lengthy trial, the
complainants, all female, variously described touching and exposure of their
genitalia and breasts unrelated to any massage treatment they had consented
to.  these allegations range from 2013 to 2021.  the defendant also faces one
count of mischief arising from a claim that he cut a tree on one complainant’s
property without her permission.
the
crown brought a successful similar fact application at the close of its case.
for reasons reported at
2024 oncj 623
, i granted the application not for all
complainants across all counts, but in relation to specific categories of
conduct where i found sufficient similarity.  my analysis of the evidence in
making my ultimate decision in this case will be informed by this ruling.
counsel
for the defendant urges me to find that the complainants are not credible.  she
points to what she says are inconsistencies in their evidence and to the lack
of memory shown by some of them.  on that basis, the defence argues i should
find the defendant not guilty of all charges.  alternatively, it is argued the
crown has not shown the touching in question was anything more than fleeting
and entirely accidental.  at most, it was misconstrued by the complainants and
does not amount to criminal conduct.  regarding the mischief, the defence
admits he cut the tree, but says he’d done something similar to the tree in the
past with no complaint.  further, there was no intent to damage the tree.
crown
counsel argues that each complainant was credible and reliable.  any lapses in
memory can be accounted for by the passage of time since the incidents.
while the witnesses were not perfect, their evidence is sufficient,
particularly when viewed through the lens of the similar fact ruling, to prove
the defendant’s guilt.
the law
i
remind myself that the crown bears a significant burden in this case, as they
do in all criminal cases.  a defendant can only be found guilty of an offence
if the crown proves that guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  this principle is
central to the canadian legal system.  as justice cory stated at paragraph 13
of
r.
v.
lifchus
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r. 320
:
the onus resting upon the crown to prove
the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt is inextricably linked to
the presumption of innocence. that jurors clearly understand the meaning of the
term is of fundamental importance to our criminal justice system. it is one of
the principal safeguards which seeks to ensure that no innocent person is
convicted. the marshall, morin and milgaard cases serve as a constant reminder
that our system, with all its protections for the accused, can still make
tragic errors. a fair trial must be the goal of criminal justice. there cannot
be a fair trial if jurors do not clearly understand the basic and fundamentally
important concept of the standard of proof that the crown must meet in order to
obtain a conviction.
at
paragraph 39 of that decision, justice cory offers a sample jury charge that
might assist in defining the concept of beyond a reasonable doubt:
the accused enters these proceedings
presumed to be innocent. that presumption of innocence remains throughout the
case until such time as the crown has on the evidence put before you satisfied
you beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty.
what does the expression "beyond a
reasonable doubt" mean?
the term "beyond a reasonable
doubt" has been used for a very long time and is a part of our history and
traditions of justice. it is so engrained in our criminal law that some think
it needs no explanation, yet something must be said regarding its meaning.
a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or
frivolous doubt. it must not be based upon sympathy or prejudice. rather, it is
based on reason and common sense. it is logically derived from the evidence or
absence of evidence.
even if you believe the accused is
probably guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufficient. in those
circumstances you must give the benefit of the doubt to the accused and acquit
because the crown has failed to satisfy you of the guilt of the accused beyond
a reasonable doubt.
on the other hand you must remember that
it is virtually impossible to prove anything to an absolute certainty and the
crown is not required to do so. such a standard of proof is impossibly high.
in short if, based upon the evidence
before the court, you are sure that the accused committed the offence you
should convict since this demonstrates that you are satisfied of his guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
lifchus
decision remains good law
in canada and is still cited regularly
on this point (
see:
r.
v.
smoke
2025 onca 519
,
r.
v.
mcleod
2025 onsc 4319
,
r.
v.
radmehr
2025 oncj 387 (canlii)
,
2025 oncj387
).
the
standard of beyond a reasonable doubt applies only to the elements of the
charged offence.  the crown need not prove every piece of evidence to this
level.  it is only the allegations fundamental to the offence that require such
proof.
crown
counsel has referred to an absence of evidence that any complainant had a
motive to fabricate her allegations.  the exception to this statement would be j.s.,
who defence argued was motivated to fabricate her allegations as a result of
the incident that brought about the charge of mischief.  i will address that
specific point when i review j.s.’s allegations.
a
trial court must be very careful in dealing with the issue of motivation to
fabricate.  the court of appeal for ontario considered this difficult area of
the law
in
r.
v.
polemidiotis
2024 onca 905
.  justice copeland
warned of three potential problems.  first, i must remember that even if i find
no evidence of a motive to fabricate, that does not equate to a positive finding
of no motive to fabricate.  second, i must be careful not to expect the
defendant to provide a motive for the complainants to fabricate.  this would
shift the burden that is borne exclusively by the crown and require the
defendant to offer reasons he should be acquitted.  finally, a lack of evidence
of a motive to fabricate does not inexorably lead to a finding that a witness
is telling the truth.  it is a factor that goes into the whole of the
credibility and reliability assessment.  it is not dispositive.
rather
than repeat this caution with each review, i will state at this point that i
have found no evidence of a motive to fabricate the allegations of any
complainant (i will address the motivation of the property damage as related to
j.s. when i consider her evidence).  that there is no evidence of a motive to
fabricate regarding any of the complainants is a factor that inures to their
credibility but does not cause me, on its own, to accept their evidence.
the
essential elements of sexual assault were set out by the supreme court of
canada in the case of
r.
v.
g.f.
2021 scc 20 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 20
.  at
paragraph 25, justice karakatsanis stated:
the actus reus of
sexual assault requires the crown to establish three things: (i) touching; (ii)
of an objectively sexual nature; (iii) to which the complainant did not consent:
ewanchuk, at para. 25; r. v. chase,
1987 canlii 23 (scc)
,
2 s.c.r. 293
. the first two elements
are determined objectively, while the third element is subjective and
determined by reference to the complainant's internal state of mind towards the
touching: ewanchuk, at paras. 25-26. at the mens rea stage, the crown must show
that (i) the accused intentionally touched the complainant; and (ii) the
accused knew that the complainant was not consenting, or was reckless or
wilfully blind as to the absence of consent: ewanchuk, at para. 42. the
accused's perception of consent is examined as part of the mens rea, including
the defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent: r. v.
barton,
2019 scc 33
, at para.
90
.
the
elements of mischief, as particularized by the crown in this case, are:
(1)
wilful
damage
(2)
without
legal justification or excuse
(3)
without
colour of right
(4)
property
of the complainant
all
of these elements must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt to merit a
conviction on that count.
finally,
as this trial included both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence, i must apply
the principles set out in
r.
v.
w.(d.)
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 742
.  if i
believe the evidence that exculpates the defendant, which may come from him
directly or from any other witness, i must acquit him of the related count or
counts.  if i do not believe that evidence but it nonetheless raises a
reasonable doubt, i must likewise acquit him.  if i do not believe, nor am i
left with a reasonable doubt by the exculpatory evidence, i must determine if,
on the basis of the evidence i do accept, the crown has proved one or more
counts beyond a reasonable doubt.  only if the answer to that question is yes should
i enter a conviction.
i
remind myself that the defendant’s conduct may be unusual, objectionable, or
not in keeping with standard massage therapy practices without rising to the
level of criminal conduct.  the defendant is not on trial for being a sloppy or
inefficient practitioner, or a bad neighbour; he is on trial for multiple
criminal offences.  he is presumed innocent of those offences unless the crown
is able to rebut that presumption beyond a reasonable doubt.
in
these reasons, i will consider the evidence one complainant at a time.  i
cannot, however, assess the defendant’s evidence in a series of silos.  i am
entitled, and indeed, required, to assess it as a whole.  while he deserves a
separate assessment as to each complainant’s allegations, that assessment must
be informed by my overall appraisal of his credibility and reliability.  the
same must be said for the complainants’ evidence.  while i will consider each
in turn, all witnesses, whether for the crown or defence, must be evaluated
against all the evidence heard in the trial.
after
reviewing all the evidence and the submissions of counsel, i find i reach
different conclusions on different counts.  the defendant will be found guilty
of some counts, but not guilty of others.  i will provide my specific findings
in the reasons that follow.
admissions
at
the outset of trial, jurisdiction and identity were admitted.  further, as the
trial progressed, several anatomical diagrams were introduced by the parties on
consent, as were photographs of the backyard where the mischief is alleged to
have occurred.  the crown also took no issue with the filing of various
educational materials by the defence.
the
crown also sought to amend two counts to conform to the evidence.  the date on
count 3 was amended to read from 1 – 6 july 2021, and the start of the date
range on count 10 was amended to read 2013.  these amendments were made on
consent of the defence.
as
well, two agreed statements of fact were jointly filed, together with an
expert’s report.
the evidence
i
will review the evidence of each complainant.  before i do, i pause to note
that the assessment of witness credibility in a similar fact application is
very different from the assessment carried out when determining a verdict.  at
the application stage, a judge must only be satisfied that the proposed
evidence is reasonably capable of belief (
see:
r.
v.
handy
2002 scc 56 (canlii)
,
2 s.c.r. 908
;
r.
v.
larsen
n.w.t.j. no. 47 (c.a.)
).  it
need not be accepted as proof beyond a reasonable doubt for an application to
succeed.  conversely, that higher standard must be met when determining if the
crown has proved its case.  in the result, while i will borrow heavily from my
recitation of the evidence set out in the similar fact ruling, i will
necessarily supplement it with more detailed evaluation as the standard at this
stage is much higher.
the
evidence heard and filed in this case has been voluminous.  if i do not refer
specifically to any one piece of evidence in my analyses, that does not mean i
haven’t considered it.  i have reviewed all the evidence in this trial to come
to my decision, whether or not i explicitly refer to particular pieces of it.
in
recounting each complainant’s evidence, i will quote from the summaries found
in the similar fact ruling.  in each case where an indented summary is quoted,
that is the source.
j.s.
the
complainant j.s. first became a patient of the defendant in 2014.  she was also
the defendant’s neighbour.
j.s.
has a long history in athletics.  she is a former canadian champion boxer and
was a member of the national team.  at the time of her dealings with the
defendant, she was training as a marathon runner with the goal of qualifying
for the boston marathon.
like many
long-distance runners, j.s. encountered injuries in her training.  she
testified that she first spoke to the defendant when she was in her backyard
swimming pool.  she was running in the water, attempting to maintain her
fitness while dealing with a calf injury.  the defendant called out to her over
their shared fence, asking what she was doing.  she told him and he offered to
help her.  at first she declined, but they eventually agreed he would try to
assist her.  for her first appointment, he came to her house.  afterward, she
felt significant relief.  she kept seeing him, and within a few treatments she
was back to running.
massages
continued for several years.  j.s. would attend twice a month, first at her
home, then at mifflin chiropractic, where the defendant worked, then once at a
different clinic, and then at his home.  she would tell him what areas of her
body needed work and he would address them.  she recalled paying $150 for each
two-hour massage.  she used her benefits from her employment, and she recalled
signing a consent form at mifflin regarding the massaging of sensitive areas.
she recalled going to mifflin chiropractic from 2014-2020 but said the
defendant began working out of his home before then end of 2020.  at that
point, she was paying a total of $50 for two two-hour massages per month.  she
never signed any consents after the initial forms at mifflin chiropractic.
she had no
complaint with any massages she received from the defendant for the first
several years of their professional relationship.  to the contrary, she felt
very satisfied with his skill in treating her various injuries.  in addition,
as neighbours, they would communicate regularly by text message.
her
view of his massages changed in 2021.
previously,
she had always kept her underwear on during massages.  on a day in may or june
of 2021, when she was seeing the defendant at his home, she testified that she
forgot and took them off when undressing before a massage.  the defendant had
left the room to let her get undressed and when he returned, she was already
lying on the table.  she told him she had mistakenly taken off her underwear
and asked him to leave so she could put them back on.  rather than exit, he
suggested she keep them off as it would make massaging easier.  she agreed.
that massage, she said, was unremarkable.  from that point, however, “things
took a turn”.
a frequent
area of injury for j.s. was her groin.  specifically, her hip adductors,
abductors, and flexors were often treated by the defendant.  for a long time,
she had no issue with either how she was draped or covered during the massages,
nor with the nature of the physical touching.
after the
first massage without underwear, she continued to see the defendant.  she
continued to remove her underwear for appointments as she agreed it was easier
for the defendant to massage her without them.  on two or three occasions where
she was not wearing underwear, she alleges the defendant touched her
improperly.
the touches
took place when she was lying on her stomach.  the defendant was massaging the
back of her leg.  she felt his finger touch her vagina.  she said each touch
was brief, only about a second, but that it made her fearful and want to
rationalize what had happened.  she was concerned he may try to penetrate her
with his finger.  as i said, she testified to this happening on two or three
different visits to the defendant.  throughout, she was trying not to assume
the worst, and as she said, to brush it off.  she said these touches happened
between may and july 2021.
she also
testified to changes in how she was draped by the defendant during this time.
at the time of the may – july massages, j.s. would be nude during her
treatments.  in years past, the defendant would cover her with sheets or
towels, and generally only uncover the body part he was working on.  in this
timeframe, however, more of her body would be left uncovered.  she spoke of one
massage where her upper body was covered but both her legs were exposed.  the
defendant only put a small washcloth over her vagina.  she estimated the size
of the washcloth to be about 6” square.  her legs were bent at 45 degrees with
her feet flat on the table.  the defendant massaged her legs vigorously, leading
the washcloth to move around as he did.  this made her very uncomfortable.  she
could feel air on her vagina, which told her she was uncovered.
j.s. spoke
of another incident, again from may – july, where she was lying on her back.
she said the defendant climbed onto the massage table, with both his knees on
her right side.  he put his hands around her hips and lifted her off the
table.  he thrusted her up and down with his hands for almost a minute.  she
didn’t know why he was doing this.  she guessed it was akin to a chiropractic
treatment.  she was asked if she was suffering from any new injuries at the
time of this incident and testified that in fact she did not have any injuries
at that point.  this massage, she said, was simply for maintenance, not for the
treatment of a specific issue.
on 1 july,
another incident took place.  she was lying on her stomach.  the defendant was
massaging her left leg.  she said he circled his arms around her leg and held
his hands together under it.  he then moved in a see-saw motion and rubbed her
vagina.  within 2-3 seconds, she raised her hips off the table and said, “whoa,
whoa, way too close”.  she said it took a second for him to release his hands,
but he did.  he apologized and completed the massage.  this event left her
feeling rattled and shaken.
she also
testified to other times when the defendant would be massaging her leg and his
hand would go near her vagina.  he would leave his hand near her groin, with
his index finger in the crease between her leg and genital area.  he wouldn’t
move it, but instead would continue his conversation with her while his hand
rested there.  she said his hand would remain there for “probably ten seconds”
while he talked to her.  though he didn’t touch her vagina on these occasions,
the act of leaving his hand there for so long made her feel awkward and
uncomfortable.  she testified that he never touched her like that in the years
of massages she had until she stopped wearing underwear.
finally, j.s.
testified about an incident from 6 july.  following the incident on 1 july, she
began wearing underwear during the massages again.  on that occasion, she was
lying on her back.  the defendant was massaging her hip flexors, which go
beyond the hip area into the abdomen.  her lower body was covered by a sheet
while her upper body was covered by a towel.  the only exposed area was her
abdomen.  he was massaging her hip flexors when, she said, he suddenly pulled
the towel off her chest and dropped it on the floor.  this exposed her
breasts.  she immediately sat up and covered herself with her hands.  she
pulled the sheet that had been on her legs up to her neck.  she said he
finished the massage with the sheet covering up to her neck.
when she
left, she said he made an unusual comment.  he asked if she had to go home and
feed her baby.  she surmised this was because he’d seen her breasts.  she was
breast-feeding at the time, and they were larger than usual.  the comment
offended her.
that was
the last time she saw the defendant for a massage.  she tried to put him off
without explaining why but eventually told him why she no longer wanted him to
be her masseur.  in the time following her departure, she said he came to her
and gave her fresh produce.  she said he told her half his life ended when he
stopped massaging her.  she said he had tears in his eyes.  when she told him
she didn’t have the money to continue seeing him, he offered to loan her the
money.  he asked if he could be her posture specialist or foot specialist
instead.  she declined.  she testified that when she did tell him about the
inappropriate touching and in particular his rubbing of her vagina, he said,
“i’m sorry, it was very selfish of me.”
j.s.
is also the complainant on the charge of mischief.  as to that count, she
testified that when she and her husband were out of town, someone significantly
cut back the large tree in their backyard.  she had testified, and it was not
contested, that her backyard shared a fence with the defendant’s.  the tree was
near her property line.  she testified that when they returned home, her
husband asked if she’d seen what had happened to the tree.  when she looked,
she saw that the left side of the tree (the side facing the defendant’s
property) had been severely cut back.  in her words, it was “basically
telephone-poled”.  exhibits 4 and 5 were photographs taken by j.s. in october
2021.  they show the tree in question as she said it looked on their return
home.  exhibit 4 shows a large, mature tree with significant growth on the
right side of the trunk.  it is a tall tree, extending well past the height of
the structure behind it, identified by j.s. as their shed.  the left side of
the trunk has one branch that extends back and over that structure, but no
other branches are present.  instead, there are several nubs where it seems
branches were cut off, flush with the trunk.  exhibit 5 is a closeup of the
tree, showing the cuts made at the trunk.  the result is a very lop-sided tree
with no growth on the left side.  j.s. confirmed in her evidence that the
defendant’s property was to the left of the photographs.
on
seeing what had been done, j.s. confronted the defendant over text.  these
texts, together with many others, were filed as exhibits.
the
message exchange began, according to the exhibit, the evening of 7 october.  at
the times noted, j.s. wrote:
7:44:25
hi
jeff, we got home from vacation yesterday and noticed you severely butchered
our beautiful maple tree.  it looks awful and you cut 6 feet into our property
line.  you never had permission from us to do this.  what’s going on?  you
can’t do that.  it’s illegal and destruction of property.
7:45:35
like
who does that?
7:49:03
i’m
calling a lawyer in the morning.  just terrible.
later
that evening, the defendant responded:
10:51:32
oh
my dear!
kim and
i are so sorry you’re feeling that way.
please understand
that kim emma and i all have very severe allergies to that tree.  it’s been an
absolute nightmare for many years now.  we get irritated skin eyes and sinuses
from the pollen.  just terrible.  last year was a doozy.  kim and emma were
helping me do the annual cleanup of the pruned and broken off branches leaves
and seed pods and we all had a severe reaction.  kim and emma gave up and i had
to finish myself :(
i have to take an
allergy pill then immediately after the cleaning up i jump into the bath scrub
off as much pollen as i can and use eye drops and a nasal spray.
i can’t tell you
how many times kim has cursed the previous owners for selfishly planting a
giant sycamore (that grows up to 120 feet tall and 80 feet wide) only 8 feet
from the property line.
what
kind of people do that?  they were terrible neighbours.
we can’t even use
part of our yard because of the allergens from that tree but we’ve just gotten
used to avoiding it.  we’ve never said anything to you guys about it because
you didn’t plant it and we have always tried to be good neighbours.  we love
trees but as the tree gets bigger though our allergic reactions are getting worse.
every year we have to cut the limbs that are growing onto our property.  it’s
not a maple tree it’s a sycamore tree and the branches grow 3-4 feet each
year.  this trimming task has been going on for at least 10 years.  i’m so
sorry that you’re [sic] feelings are hurt about the tree.  we didn’t know you
cared about the branches growing towards our yard.  we just wanted to trim it
back so we don’t have to deal with so many allergic reactions it creates.  it’s
a super fast growing sycamore and it will fill out again.
please accept our
most sincere apology for trimming too much and please don’t let this tree
trimming ruin our relationship  kim often says your [sic] the best neigbors
anyone could dream of and i agree!
in case you didn’t
know we love you guys and think you are awesome [heart emoji]
in
the exchange that followed, the defendant brought up that he’d done some
trimming of the tree with j.s.’s knowledge two weeks earlier.  she agreed but
said his trimming had stopped at the property line.  at no point had he gone
onto their property to cut any branches.
i
note from the photographs that the fence marking the dividing line between the
properties does appear to be 6-8 feet from the trunk of the tree, in keeping
with j.s.’s estimate of six feet and the defendant’s text, which referenced a
distance of eight feet, and testimony, which referenced six feet.  the cuts to
the branches were done at the trunk, and so were well within the s. property
line.
in
cross-examination, j.s. agreed that the defendant had cut the tree in the past,
but she was adamant he’d never cut past the property line.  she also testified
that she had never been told anything about allergies from which the
defendant’s family may have suffered.
it
was put to her that she was so angry about the tree that when she reported it
to police, she also concocted the sexual assault allegations.  she denied that
suggestion, pointing out that her texts where she told him his massages had
left her feeling violated and vulnerable had been sent months earlier.
in
cross-examination, j.s. acknowledged she’d gotten along reasonably well with
the defendant and his family from the time they became neighbours.  she agreed
that when she could no longer use her benefits to pay for treatments, she
continued and paid out of pocket.  he was, in her estimation, an effective and
caring practitioner.
she
confirmed signing consent forms for the massages performed at mifflin chiropractic.
beyond that, she agreed she was fine with the defendant massaging areas like
her groin, thighs, and glute muscles, as those were areas she specifically
wanted him to treat.
she
testified to wearing underwear for all treatments until may 2021.  she agreed
it was her choice to wear it or not, but said she felt pressured not to wear
them as he’d told her the massaging would be easier without them.  on the first
day she did not wear underwear, she said she took them off unintentionally
along with her pants.  when she told him and asked him to leave so she could
put them back on, he told her she could keep them off if she wanted as it would
be easier to do the massage.  she felt pressured to keep them off as otherwise
she felt it would show she wasn’t trusting him.  she kept them off.  she denied
she’d simply forgotten to wear underwear that day.  it was suggested to her
that when she told him she’d forgotten to wear it he gave her time and she put
them back on.  she denied that suggestion.
counsel
asked about her statement to police, wherein she said there was an occasion
“where i forgot to put underwear on”.  she agreed she’d said that to police but
clarified and said she meant that she forgot to put it on when she went onto
the massage table.
she
agreed with the suggestion that she was generally a vocal person who can stand
up for herself but qualified that by saying that she’s shy and only speaks up
when she has to.  there were times, she said, when she didn’t have the courage
to speak up to him when she felt uncomfortable.  times when she wanted to say
something but didn’t, or when she froze.
regarding
the hip thrusting incident, j.s. testified that the defendant did not seek
permission to perform that maneuver beforehand and offered no explanation for
why it was done.  she did not ask questions as she was, in her words,
speechless.  she disagreed that he did ask for permission and explain to her
that the move would be useful for loosening the si joint.
she
did not ask him about this after the massage as she wanted to believe there was
a medical reason for him doing what he did.
j.s.
was also asked about a time when the defendant left his hand sitting in the
crease near her genitals.  it was suggested to her that he was employing
myofascial release and had been applying pressure to the area.  she disagreed
and was clear that no pressure had been applied.  she acknowledged that in her
statement to police she had offered that he might have been trying to find a
pressure point, but said in her testimony that was simply her trying to assign
a reason to his action.  she said again that he would leave his hand there for
at least ten seconds.
she
was asked about the defendant using only a washcloth to cover her vaginal
area.  she repeated that she was on her back with her feet flat on the table
and her knees bent.  she testified that her vagina was uncovered for the
purpose of him removing the proper draping and replacing it with the
washcloth.  she agreed she didn’t say anything when it happened, as she didn’t
want him to feel awkward.  counsel asked if it was really his feelings that she
was concerned about, and she replied she wished she’d said something.  as she
said, “lesson learned”.
it
was put to j.s. that she referred a co-worker, c., to the defendant.  she
testified that c. had already been to the defendant for treatment and that she simply
gave her his new number.  it was suggested that had events happened as she
described, she would not have referred another female patient to him.  she said
that at the time she gave her his number, while there had been some
uncomfortable incidents, she was still trying to rationalize them and downplay
them.  she did testify that had she been asked for the referral after the
incident where he pulled the towel off her chest, she would never have given
it.
as
to the incident where the defendant allegedly circled his arms around and under
j.s.’s leg and moved in a see-saw motion, she confirmed that she verbalized, “whoa
whoa way too close”.  it was suggested to her that by saying “too close”, she
was tacitly saying there was no actual contact.  that is, had there been actual
contact with her vagina, she would not have said “too close”, she would have
complained of the actual contact.  the witness testified she was stressed and
nervous when she said what she did, and that is just what came out.
i
accept that evidence.
i
do not place any weight on the semantics of “too close” and actual contact.
the incident was a surprise to j.s.  she reacted immediately, with no time
given to choosing the right words.  i do not take anything from her choice of
words made in that moment.
she
was asked about continuing to see the defendant even after the inappropriate
incidents.  she testified that she believed once she started wearing underwear
during the massages again, nothing more would happen.  she did not feel there
was any chance of further problems.  this is from her cross-examination on 9
february 2024:
a.
like, he’s not
somebody that – that scared me at the time. like, i wasn’t scared that he was
going to try to force my underwear off or something terrible. like, i didn’t
feel unsafe in his house. i didn’t feel like my safety at the time when all
this happened, was in jeopardy.
this
answer reflects much of j.s.’s testimony.  she did not appear to be going out
of her way to further incriminate the defendant.  she was unequivocal in
praising his abilities as a massage therapist.  she relied on him to help her
achieve her athletic goals and trusted his expertise.  it wasn’t until the
events of 6 july, when she said he pulled the towel off her chest and later
asked about feeding her baby that she was certain he had bad intentions.
when
asked about that final incident, where the towel was pulled off, it was
suggested that the towel came off accidentally when both she and the defendant
pulled at it simultaneously.  she disagreed.  it was agreed by counsel,
however, that the defendant asking if she had to go home to feed her baby was
not included in her statement to police (though i note in his own evidence, the
defendant admitted to making that comment).
j.s.
was asked about feeling pressured to return to the defendant for more
treatments.  she testified to his actions causing her to feel that pressure.
following the 6 july massage (where she said he pulled the towel off her
chest), the two exchanged text messages.  he asked her how her run had gone
that day and she replied she’d gotten through it but was still having an issue
with her stomach.  she sent him pictures of cats from her backyard.  they then
wrote the following.  i have not included times as they are not relevant to the
exchange:
young:                     see
you tomorrow at 9am?
j.s.:                           i’m
out of cash!  i’m going to see how it is tmw and go from there :) thank you
though !
young:                     ok
sure thing
i
can lend you $20 too lol :)
j.s.:                           thanks
jeff!  i’m going to see if i can get rid of it and if i can’t i’ll set
something up :)
she
was asked about carrying on a normal conversation after all that had happened.
she said she didn’t want to “ruffle feathers” as the defendant was her
neighbour and she didn’t know how saying something might affect her or her
family.
four
days later, she texted him again.  from 11 july, these were the messages:
j.s.:                           hey
jeff, my friend k. (rmt), seen me running the other day and we got talking and
she agreed to take over my massage therapy treatments.  this way i can use my
coverage and save some money.  as you know running can be a very expensive
sport and this will definitely help out!  just wanted to thank you so much for
all the help thus far in my running journey
young:                     oh
j.
i
can understand you need to do what is best for you and your family.  i’m sorry
that you have to go to someone else and i’m sorry that i couldn’t fill the role
that you needed on your journey.  my sincere apologies to you.  wishing you all
the best and thank you so very much for all your compliments.  you made me feel
like i was special and i helped you in a way no one else could.   that made me
want to work even harder to help you be your best
wishing you all
the best
j.s.:                           the
thing is the last 2 massages have not been professional.  left me feeling
violated and vulnerable.  i can’t have that.  it didn’t sit well with me.  i
have to go with my gut and change things up.
young:                     omg
i’m so sorry j.!
i
feel terrible for that.  please forgive me for making you feel that way :( you
should never have to feel that way.  i had no idea!  i want you to know that im
[sic] terribly sorry.  i will do my best if you feel it in your heart to give
me another chance.  i don’t expect you to.  please let me make this right or at
least apologize to you in person.
j.s.:                           i
accept your apology jeff.  thank you for that.
i
pause to observe that it is odd to me, when told he made her feel violated and
vulnerable during massages, he never asked her what she was talking about.  he
never asked what specifically made her feel that way.  he just asked for
forgiveness and another chance.
she
repeated in cross-examination that after she told him she would be going
elsewhere for massage therapy he came to her house.  she said he gave her some
produce from his garden.  he had tears in his eyes and told her half his life
ended when they stopped working together.  all of this led her to feel
pressured to return to him.
there
was no further contact by text until 24 august, some six weeks later, when the
defendant wrote:
young:         hi!
i
hope you are doing well!
i’m
here for you if you need anything
even
to talk
further
texts were exchanged as the defendant left more produce for her.  she texted
her thanks.  in her evidence, she said she was trying to keep the waters
peaceful and live successfully as neighbours.
on
30 august, the defendant texted her again:
young:         hey
j.!
hope
your [sic] doing great!
i
found this on my phone and didn’t know i had it lol
check
it out!
hey jeff, it’s me j.!
i have t.’s phone.  i just ran the race if [sic] my life today.  full marathon
in 3:30:33!  i never thought i could run that fast :) although i narrowly
missed qualifying for boston i’m so happy they tightened up the times this
year.  if it wasn’t for that i would have never aimed for 3:30  a huge thank
you goes out to you!  i really couldn’t have done it without you :) thank you
so much jeff!  you are an amazing massage therapist and kept me going through
the training cycle
i
can’t tell you how great it felt to receive that note from you!
its
like an award for a year of hard work for you and i :)
i
can only hope that you make me part of your team again!
maybe i can take
care of your feet and monitor your posture and do fascial stretching?
i
want you to be your best so i’m here for you if you want me                         to
help
she
did not respond to this message.
the
next text from j.s. came in october and involved the cutting of their tree.
when
asked about the cutting of the tree in cross-examination, she agreed that while
he had cut the tree in the past, it had only been the portion on his side of
the fence.  prior to 2021 he had never entered their property to cut the tree.
she agreed he had done other things for them in the past, like shovel their
driveway or fix the lock on their gate.
in
his testimony, the defendant addressed the allegations made by j.s.
starting
with the first massage where she was not wearing underwear, he testified that
when he came into the room that day she told him she’d taken them off.  he said
he was not comfortable massaging her if she’d done it accidentally, and left
the room so she could put them back on.  when he returned two minutes later,
she told him she’d decided to keep them off.  he told her he’d use extra
draping to ensure she was covered.  he testified that at all times, she
understood her draping and clothing options.
he
was asked about the massage where he lifted j.s.’s hips up off the table.  he
called it a joint mobilization technique.  his description differed from j.s.’s.
while she spoke of a thrusting movement where he lifted her hips off the table
and moved her up and down, he spoke of a pressing movement meant to open up her
sacroiliac joint.  he began with lighter presses and gradually increased the
weight he put on her with a rebounding movement.  he was adamant that they
discussed the procedure beforehand and that she was agreeable to it.  he said
he checked with her through the duration of the movement, 8-10 seconds, and
that she never expressed any discomfort.
he
confirmed this was the first and only time he performed this technique on her.
as he determined her si joint was in good shape, there was no need to do it
again.
while
the descriptions of this encounter varied between the parties, i find they can
be reconciled.  it is entirely possible that in using what he called a
rebounding technique and pressing repeatedly on j.s.’s hips, the defendant
could have given her the impression that he was actually lifting her up off the
table.  she said he had both knees up on the table, while he said he only had
one in that position.  she said it went on for almost a minute, he said it was
8-10 seconds.  i don’t believe anything turns on these specifics.  in the
result, i cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that this action was undertaken
without consent and with the purpose of violating j.s.’s sexual integrity.
this incident cannot be the basis for a finding of guilt.
he
addressed the incident where j.s. said he rested his hand near her genitals for
an extended period for no apparent reason.  he testified that this was done as
part of a myofascial release technique, and that he was using his hand to
search for any areas of restriction.  this required subtle movements and, he
said, a deft touch.  he said she was draped completely except for her right
leg, which was uncovered up to the hip area.  at the time, j.s. did not express
any discomfort with this technique.
again,
i find the difficulty here to arise from contrasting interpretations.  it would
have been better if the defendant had told j.s. why he was doing what he was
doing as he was doing it.  i cannot, however, reject the explanation given in
his testimony.  i find this incident cannot form the basis for conviction.
the
defendant was asked about his use of a washcloth to cover j.s.  he testified
that he never used washcloths for that purpose.  he only ever used towels that
measured approximately 30” x 16”, one of which was filed as an exhibit at the
trial.  he denied ever using a washcloth to cover her vaginal area.
as
to the alleged touching of j.s.’s vagina during inner thigh massage, the
defendant denied any intentional contact.  at most, he said, he may have made
contact with the draping that was covering her.
he
testified to the relationship his family had with the s.’s.  he said they got
along well.  he and his wife would often give them produce from their garden, and
they would support the various school fundraisers the s. children participated
in.  on one occasion, he gave them a pool filter he’d obtained.  j.s. was
always thankful.
the
massage on 1 july was the treatment that included what j.s. referred to as the
see-saw motion.  the defendant testified that she gave an “improper
description” of what he did that day.  rather than circling her leg with his
hands, he described a movement where one of his hands moved up while the other
moved down on her hip flexor area.  he said he was moving quickly,
approximately three strokes per second.  this only continued for 8-10 seconds
as he could feel the area heating up from the friction.  he stopped and asked
if she was ok.  he said she responded that she was, but that “it’s just a
little close”.  he said he told her he didn’t mean to come close.  she said she
knew, and that he wasn’t doing anything wrong.  he said she then said that he
was doing what she told him to do.
the
massage on 6 july, he said, was at her request.  this is borne out by the text
messages.  she was having difficulty with a side stitch and asked if she could
attend that evening.  he agreed.  he said she showed him where the pain was and
physically guided his hand to the right spot beneath her ribs.  when massaging
that area, he said he had a towel over her chest.  at one point he took hold of
the bottom corners of the towel to adjust its position, using what he described
as a “pincher grip”.  he said she grabbed the top corners of the towel at the
same time and pulled upward.  this caused him to lose his grip.  the corner of
the towel sprung upwards and left her breast uncovered, though he testified
that he did not see anything before he took the towel back and returned it to
where it had been.  he said she said “whoa”.  he said he didn’t know what
happened, he had only been trying to get the towel under her ribcage.  she said
never mind, just go back to what you were doing.
this
differed from j.s.’s account.  her evidence was that removing the towel shocked
her speechless.  she covered herself with her hands and then with the sheet
that had been on her lower body.  she said he apologized.  i would note that
she testified to the towel being overtop of her chest and arms, which if true
would make it difficult for her to have taken hold of the top corners of the
towel, as the defendant claimed.
his
own cross-examination seems to contradict his initial appraisal of her
reaction.  in chief, he said she simply said never mind and to get back to what
he was doing.  in cross he said he knew she was “flustered” about the towel
flipping up.  i’m not sure how to reconcile those two statements.
he
testified to their face-to-face interaction following the texts where she
discharged him as her therapist.  he said he was outside, and she came up to
him.  it appeared she had just come back from a run.  he said she asked how he
was doing.  he said not very well, considering their last text messages.  she
told him she wasn’t ready to talk then, but that she was now.  she then said
she would give him a hug but she was sweaty from her run.  they then talked
about why she felt violated.
her
mention of a hug but for her being sweaty, and about not being ready to talk
then but being ready now, was not part of j.s.’s evidence.
regarding
the tree, the defendant testified to cutting it back on his property in 2015.
he said the s.’s knew he was doing this as he’d pointed out to j.s. how the
branches were hitting his shed.
his
evidence on cutting the tree centred on the fact that he’d done it in the past
without controversy.  he said the cuts he made in 2021 were the same as those
he’d made in 2015.  in 2021, he began pruning the tree when j.s. was present.
he said he had a pruner on a long pole and that he cut branches “at the trunk
of the tree”.  he told her to throw the branches to his side of the fence and
he would collect them, but she said she’d take care of it.  he couldn’t
complete the work that day as his pruner wasn’t up to the job.  he resumed
approximately one week later.  it was this second incident that led to j.s.’s
anger.
his
text to j.s. on 7 october said, “no-one went behind your back and nothing was
cut when you were away.  the tree was trimmed 2 weeks ago when you were home.”
by his own evidence, this is at best incorrect and at worst untruthful.
in
his evidence, as i said, the defendant focused on his past trimming of the tree
because it was impacting his own property.  the only time he mentioned
allergies in his evidence was when he acknowledged the texts he sent.  in the
texts, he focused on his family’s allergies as the reason he cut it back and
made no mention of potential damage to his shed.  as to past cuts, his text
only said, “every year we have to cut the limbs
that are growing onto our
property
.”  there is no suggestion in his texts of prior cuts that went
back to the trunk of the tree.
in
his own cross-examination related to j.s.’s allegations, the defendant
reiterated much of what he said in his evidence in chief.
regarding
the hip thrust/si joint incident, he said she told him the movement felt “a
little weird”.  he did not follow up with her to ask what was weird about it.  this
exchange then took place:
q. and you don't ask as her service
provider, go, “what do you mean by weird?” that might be an injury. “what do
you mean by weird?” what's “weird”?
a. i wasn't a service provider at the
time, i was a masseur, not a registered massage therapist.
q. you were providing her a service, mr.
young?
a. yes, i was.
this
exchange is notable not for his failure to follow up on what j.s. may have
meant by the word “weird”, but for his care in differentiating between a
service provider and a masseur.  it is certainly an inference available to be
drawn in assessing the defendant’s credibility that he was framing his evidence
in this way to lower the bar for what he was required to do.
crown
counsel also asked him about his communications with j.s.  referring to the
text messages, it was suggested that it was he who initiated most of the
contact.  he also booked her appointments sometimes without her asking for
them.  it was agreed there was a standing bi-weekly appointment every other
thursday.  the 1 july massage was one of those appointments.  despite the
schedule being bi-weekly, he told her on 5 july (monday) that he’d booked her
in for 8 july.  when she asked him to postpone to the following thursday (in
keeping with the set schedule), he responded with “okay i have you booked every
thursday lol!  we have to get you to your max!”  he testified that this was
meant as a joke, as evidenced by his addition of “lol”.  i don’t see how this
is an attempt at humour as it’s followed immediately by him saying he wants to
get her to her max.  in my view, it shows his involvement in booking her
appointments even without being asked.
he
was asked about the tree pruning.  he admitted he assumed he had the s.’s
permission to enter their property and trim the tree.  he agreed he never
specifically asked for permission to trim it.  he denied cutting it when he
knew they weren’t home, and denied that he did it out of anger over the end of
their professional relationship.  he testified to a memory of his 2015 conversation
with j.s. where she looked at the tree, tilted her head up, and then looked
back at him.  she agreed he could cut the tree back.  his memory of this event,
ten years later, is remarkably detailed.
that
level of memory is noteworthy when compared to his lack of memory for other events.
for example, he could not recall if j.s. attended for a massage on 8 july.  he
could not recall conclusively what he charged his other clients.  he could not
recall if, in his conversation with j.s. after the massages ended, he told her
he’d been selfish.  he could not say for certain if, after the 30 august text,
they had a face-to-face conversation about him rejoining her treatment team.  it
is odd that he would not remember points like these but could recall with
clarity j.s. tilting her head towards the tree and then looking at him.
he
was asked about the texts he sent j.s. in august.  it was suggested to him that
his messages were an attempt to continue his relationship with her.  this is
from 26 march 2025:
q. all right. so, why are you texting her
then on august 24th after a month and two weeks, “hi, i hope you're doing well.
i'm here for you if you need anything. even to talk”? you're trying to continue
a relationship with her, i'm suggesting to you?
a. well, it was a long-term therapist
relationship and i was - and i know how important it was for her to achieve her
goals running marathons, and i - i was trying to make sure she had everything
she needed.
q. she didn't want your help anymore, mr.
young and you knew it, right?
a. i disagree with that allegation.
remember,
this text was sent in august, long after j.s. had told him she no longer
required his services.  on 7 july she told him she accepted his apology.  there
was no further communication between them after that until his text, quoted
above, on 24 august.  he knew then that she was seeing a new therapist.  there
was no “long-term therapist relationship” still in existence.  her clear words
in her july texts, coupled with her silence afterward, made that readily
apparent.  his disagreement with the crown’s suggestion above shows his skewed
and unrealistic view of their association at that point.  it was over, but he
clearly didn’t want it to be.
in
the text he sent on 30 august, quoted above, he forwarded a text j.s. had sent
in 2019 where she thanked him and complimented his work.  this was a message
he’d found from years earlier, harkening back to a time when they worked
together.  he sent it after she’d already told him she was ending their professional
relationship and that his massages had made her feel uncomfortable.  in his
cross-examination he claimed the message “just popped up on my computer” and
that he hadn’t gone looking for it.  in the text itself, however, he said, “i
found this on my phone and didn’t know i had it”.  i reject his evidence that
this message simply “popped up” on his computer.  as he told j.s. directly, he
found it on his phone.  the crown’s suggestion that he had scrolled back in his
text messages with her and found the message is confirmed by the defendant’s
own words.
the
defendant then questioned whether the text record filed was complete.  this is
from 26 march 2025:
q. your client, right? when you send that
text message, she does not respond, you'll agree with me there?
a. there's nothing in her - what was
downloaded off her phone. i can’t say something was - messages weren't deleted
or whatever, that's what's available here.
q. well, tell us about the messages that
we deleted that you know about, mr. young?
a. no idea. no idea.
q. well, wouldn't you have remembered if
she responded and came back to you in terms of her care? wouldn't that stand
out in your mind?
a. well, if that happened, i would
definitely remember it.
q. and it didn't?
a. no, but there could be other messages
that are missing from here.
q. you have a memory of any other
messages? her response to that?
a. no, i don't remember any messages.
his
questioning the completeness of the record is troubling.  he immediately
follows up that question with acknowledging he doesn’t remember any other
messages.  so why question if some have been deleted?  the inference he is
asking me to draw is that j.s. actually did respond to his texts but perhaps
those messages weren’t included.  there is no evidence the record is incomplete
and he himself has no memory of any other messages that do not appear in the
record.  he is asking me to speculate on the basis of nothing.  i decline to do
that.
likewise,
he was asked about any messages between 30 august and 7 october 2021.  none
appear in the record.  when asked if he agreed there were no messages in that
period, he responded by saying, “i can’t be sure.”  he was then asked if he
remembered any other messages from that period and he said no.
one
week later, in his cross-examination from 2 april, he was asked about
suggesting some messages may have been deleted.  this exchange occurred:
q. but not like normal relations you had
with her prior to this, meaning heart emojis, talking about her running, her
physical health, that was all done, right?
a. the massage relationship and the things
we discussed regarding massage was discontinued, yes.
q. and heart emojis were discontinued,
yes?
a. there were no messages.
q. that you can remember, right?
a. well, you have the full printout of j.s.'s
phone and all the messages back and forth to her phone.
q. you told us some might be deleted, mr.
young.
a. did i say some might be deleted?
q. yes.
a. i don't remember saying that.
he
suggests without any foundation that some texts between him and j.s. may have
been deleted, and then just a week later forgets ever making that suggestion?
i do not accept this lack of memory, especially given how good his memory
apparently was for other events that took place years earlier.
returning
to the tree pruning, he agreed with counsel that he did not have specific permission
to go into the s. backyard to cut the tree in 2021.  he said j.s. asked him to
do it in 2015, and he assumed that permission was still in effect.  they had
not had any discussion in 2021 about him entering their yard to cut the tree
back.
i
also heard from kim young, the defendant’s wife.  her testimony was primarily
related to j.s.  she testified to a massage where she learned j.s. wasn’t
wearing underwear.  she said she was in the kitchen when the defendant came out
of the dining room (which was also the treatment room).  she said he looked
“concerned”.  she asked what was going on and he told her j.s. had taken her
underwear off so he’d left the room to let her put them back on.  afterward, he
told her she refused to put them back on.  she then said he told her she
decided not to put them back on.  she never explained those two different
statements.  her evidence, however, does corroborate the defendant’s that he
left the room when j.s. told him she’d removed her underwear.
she
also testified to bringing produce to the s.’s, typically from july to
september.  she was asked in chief if she or the defendant had done so in 2021
and she said she it was possible but she couldn’t remember.  in
cross-examination, however, she said she had not done it in 2021 nor in the
year before.
candidly,
i do not believe ms. young’s evidence adds very much to this case.  i am
somewhat troubled by her claim that the defendant told her j.s. had “refused”
to put her underwear back on (something the defendant himself never testified
to), and by the change in her evidence from chief to cross-examination
regarding the produce.  while i acknowledge she does corroborate the defendant
as i’ve noted, this corroboration is of less value than it might have been
because of my concerns.
in
addition to the mischief, the defendant faces three counts of sexual assault in
relation to j.s.  counts 1 and 2 are between 1 may and 1 july 2021, while count
3 is from 1 - 6 july 2021.  according to her evidence, the allegations of
labial touching took place two to three times during the may – july timeframe,
the see-saw motion took place on 1 july, and the pulling off of the towel took
place on 6 july.
i have
considered j.s.’s evidence in chief and in cross-examination.  i find her to be
a credible and reliable witness.  her descriptions of events were clear and
largely unshaken.  she did not attempt to shade her testimony in such a way as
to incriminate the defendant as much as possible.  she was factual and, in my
view, gave an unbiased account.   there were certain details testified to that
were not in her police statement, but she explained their omission.  her
testimony that the initial inappropriate actions only led her to try to shrug
them off and not assume the worst is an entirely reasonable response for a
person in that position.  massage therapy, even that carried out in a clinic by
a registered therapist, is by its very nature an intimate interaction.  it
necessarily requires close physical contact.  that contact can sometimes
involve sensitive areas of the body.  j.s.’s attempts to rationalize what she
said happened are entirely reasonable.
i
reject the notion that j.s. concocted these allegations in retaliation for what
happened with the tree.  that suggestion is belied by the text messages she
sent long before the tree incident.
in
addition, j.s.’s evidence must be assessed in light of the crown’s successful
similar fact application.  when i granted the application, i found the similar
fact evidence “will be admissible to rebut potential defences, to help prove
the actus reus of each complaint, and to bolster the credibility of each
complainant” (see par. 217 of the ruling).
j.s.’s
evidence of vaginal touching is bolstered by the evidence of the complainants j.p.
and a.r.  j.p. testified to the defendant touching her vaginal area twice.  the
first was a touch of her labia and the second was a touch of her vaginal
opening.  both occurred during an inner thigh massage.
a.r.
testified that in the course of an abdominal massage, the defendant rubbed her
clitoris.
the
evidence from j.s. that the defendant said he could do a better job if she
wasn’t wearing underwear was echoed by the complainants e.s. and a.r..
her evidence
that the defendant charged relatively little for his services, and ultimately offered
to loan her money to continue seeing him, is similar to the evidence of s.d.
and e.s.  s.d. redeemed a one-hour massage gift certificate and received a
massage of nearly three hours’ duration.  e.s. booked three one-hour massages.
the second and third went on for far longer.  in addition, when she told the
defendant she only had $500 in coverage, he told her she could pay whatever she
wanted, even just $20 per massage.  this was a significant reduction from his
initial $70 per hour fee.
j.s.
also complained of being draped improperly.  on one occasion she said she had
only a small washcloth covering her vagina.  on another, she said he suddenly
pulled a towel off her completely, exposing her breasts.  improper draping was
also complained of by five other complainants.
a.r.
testified to only having a cloth the size of a piece of printer paper covering
her buttocks during massages.  she also said both breasts were entirely exposed
when he was massaging her chest, regardless of which side he was working on.
s.d. testified
to her breasts only being covered by a small washcloth.  she also was concerned
about her vaginal area being exposed given the way he stretched her leg out
without proper covering.
a.l.
complained of her entire upper body being exposed during chest massages, with
no covering at all.
j.p.
testified that the defendant moved the sheet that had been covering her off her
chest, exposing her breasts.  she covered herself with her hands.  he asked if
she was comfortable, and she said no.  he then gave her a small towel to cover
her chest.
finally,
c.m. complained that during a massage, the defendant tried to pull the sheet
that had been covering her entire body off of her.  she said she held it in
place with her arms.
of
particular similarity with j.s., a.r. and s.d. both testified to the defendant
using a very small towel or washcloth to cover them during their massages.
j.s.
was also not the only patient who testified to continuing attempts by the
defendant to rekindle their massage relationship.
a.r.
ultimately blocked the defendant’s number given how often he was trying to
contact her.  he also tried, she said, to contact her over multiple social
media accounts both during and after her time as a client.
when c.m.
questioned the defendant’s conduct, he became angry with her.  when she said
her doctor was recommending she reduce her massage visits, the defendant told
her to “stick up for herself” and insist on maintaining more frequent visits.
when she tried to settle her final account with the defendant, she said he
threw the receipt at her.
all of
these witnesses assist in my assessment of j.s.’s credibility and reliability.
in the areas i’ve noted, they corroborate her testimony and make the defence of
accident less likely.
in this
analysis, and in all my analyses of the impact of the similar fact ruling, i am
cognizant of the fact that by granting the application, i am not binding myself
to accept the witnesses’ testimony as true.  while their accounts may assist
each other in the ways i’ve listed, the burden remains on the crown to prove
each charged offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  i am still free to accept all,
some, or none of any witness’s evidence, regardless of whether i view it
through the lens of the similar fact ruling or not.
i have
indicated above the areas where i find the evidence of j.s. and the defendant
could both be true.  an example is the si joint mobilization incident.  these
incidents cannot form the basis for a conviction, and in her submissions, crown
counsel acknowledged as much.  the counts related to j.s. relate to the alleged
vaginal touching.
i have
considered the defendant’s evidence as it relates to j.s.  he denied any
intentional vaginal touching.  regarding the touches alleged from may – july,
he suggested he may have touched the draping that he was using, resulting in j.s.
feeling like she may have been touched.  but, he said, he never intentionally
touched her genital area.  he disputed her evidence about the 1 july incident
and said her description was not only incorrect but physically impossible.  he
offered his own explanation for the technique performed that day, and also
testified to j.s.’s unremarkable reaction.  as for the incident on 6 july, when
she said he suddenly pulled the towel off her chest, he testified that he was
as surprised as she was when it happened.  he said it happened because they
were both pulling on the towel and it slipped from his grasp.
i turn
to the analysis mandated in
r.
v.
w.d
.,
supra
.  before i
do, i can advise that while i will consider the defendant’s evidence when i
address each complainant, i will also examine his evidence as a whole in
greater depth later in these reasons.
having
considered the totality of his evidence regarding j.s., i find i do not believe
the defendant.  his answers were frequently non-responsive, requiring counsel
to repeat her questions.  his memory of events was comprehensive at times, and
entirely deficient at others.  he professed to remember his exact physical
positioning when massaging j.s., including which hands were where and how long
movements took, but could not recall if they ever had a conversation about him
resuming his treatment of her after she’d discharged him.  his memory was,
overall, unreliable and frequently self-serving.
in
addition, the defendant went to great lengths to explain his education and
experience in massage and similar therapies.  his answers were often very
technical and detailed, even when the questions didn’t require such a
response.  throughout his testimony, it was clear to me the defendant wanted me
to understand how knowledgeable he was and how seriously he took his work.  that
such an experienced practitioner, scrupulous in his attention to his work,
might have accidentally and carelessly touched j.s.’s vagina on multiple
occasions is not believable.
for the
same reasons, his evidence does not raise a reasonable doubt in my mind.  i
remind myself here, as i do when assessing his evidence regarding all the
complainants, that there is no burden on the defendant to suggest an
alternative theory that might reasonably be true.  there is no burden on him to
offer anything.  the question i must ask myself at this stage is whether his
evidence leaves me with a reasonable doubt.
it does
not.  one example of his testimony that i reject as entirely implausible is his
claim that when they met outside their houses, after she’d effectively fired
him for inappropriate conduct, j.s. told him she’d give him a hug if she wasn’t
sweaty from her run.  that is contradicted by the entire substance and tenor of
j.s.’s testimony.  the notion that she wanted to hug him is contradicted by the
text messages where she described feeling “violated and vulnerable”.  in short,
he was a difficult witness whose answers were often unconnected to the
questions being asked.  his memory ebbed and flowed throughout his testimony.  his
evidence does not raise a reasonable doubt.
on the
third stage of the w.d. analysis, i accept the evidence of j.s. that on at
least two occasions from may to july, the defendant touched her vaginal area.
i also accept that on 1 july he performed a technique that allowed him to rub
her vagina.  while she gave consent for massage in general, i find as a fact
that she never consented to her genitals being touched.  i reject the notion
that the touches were accidental.  finally, i accept her account of the 6 july
incident.  in pulling the towel off her chest and exposing her breasts, the
defendant committed an application of force without her consent that violated
her sexual integrity.  the crown has proved counts 1, 2, and 3 beyond a
reasonable doubt.
as to
the count of mischief, i find the defendant did not have permission to enter
the s. property in 2021 to cut the tree.  he may have had that permission six
years earlier, but there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that permission
was ongoing.  the defendant himself agreed he simply assumed he could do it.  j.s.
had no issue with him cutting the portion of the tree that extended into his
yard but was clear in her testimony that she never expected him to do more.
the
photographs filed show nearly every branch on the side of the tree that faced
the defendant’s yard was cut back to the trunk.  looking at the photographs
from 2015 and 2016, the 2021 cut appears to have been far more severe.  indeed,
a comparison of the photos from 2016 and 2020 shows that the lower part of the
tree doesn’t look all that different.  the 2016 photo is from a closer
perspective so less of the tree is visible.  the portion that overhangs the s.
shed looks fuller in 2020 but not as full as it looked in the 2015 photo.  part
of the problem in comparing the photos is the 2020 photo has significant
shadows on the roof of the shed, making it hard to see exactly where the tree
ends and the shadows begin.  it appears that in 2015 the defendant cut only the
parts of the tree that were over the property line.  in 2021 he went much, much
further.
the
case of
r.
v.
toma
b.c.j. no 1804 (b.c.c.a.)
bears a
striking similarity:
3  the appellant,
giuseppe toma, owned the lot adjacent to the complainants' property. at the
time the trees were damaged, mr. toma was having a house built on his lot. the
other appellant, harminder singh dhanowa, was mr. toma's construction
supervisor.
4  the cutting
down and pruning of various trees on the complainants' property was done by a
utility arborist, mr. david chisholm, and his assistant. mr. chisholm testified
that he was told by the appellants that the adjacent property owner had given
his permission for the trees to be cut. had permission been given, no criminal
liability would attach but, in fact, the complainants had agreed to nothing
more than an overhanging willow tree being trimmed.
5  on 24 may 1997,
chisholm and his assistant cut down the willow and four cedars on the
complainants' property, and pruned branches from other trees including a
dogwood, a maple and two firs up to a height of about 30 feet. the cutting and
pruning on the complainants' property opened up a wide view of the sea from mr.
toma's lot.
at
trial, toma was convicted of mischief over $5,000, as was his construction
supervisor dhanowa.  on appeal, dhanowa’s conviction was set aside in favour of
a conviction for mischief under $5,000.  the findings of the trial judge were
otherwise upheld.
in
doing what he did, i find the defendant damaged the s.’s tree.  that it might
eventually re-grow is not a defence.  based on the pictures filed, and the
defendant’s own evidence, he cut several branches back to the trunk.  whether i
choose his explanation that the overhanging branches were damaging his shed, or
that the tree was a source of allergens, there was no justifiable reason to cut
the branches back to the trunk.  he could simply have repeated what it appears
he did in 2015: cut the overhanging portions.  instead, he entered the s.
property and caused significant damage to the tree.  was this in retaliation
for j.s. ending their massage relationship?  i find i do not have to answer
that question.  his motivation is not an element of the offence.  he caused
damage to the tree intentionally and without any permission.  he will be found
guilty of count 4.
j.p.
j.p.
saw the defendant at mifflin chiropractic in 2015.
as i said
above, j.p. is the spouse of a.l.  she was also a client of the defendant.  in
2021, after being alerted to a media article about the defendant by her
then-current massage therapist, she provided a statement to police about her
dealings with him.
she began
seeing the defendant around may of 2015, having been referred by a neighbour.
at the time she was training for a half-marathon and had developed pain in her
foot.  she saw the defendant at mifflin chiropractic and paid for her (and a.l.’s)
massages with her benefits.  when those ran out, she paid out-of-pocket.
initially,
her treatment focused on her feet.  once they started to feel better, her
massages, at the defendant’s suggestion, began to include other areas of her
body including her back and shoulders.  she did not recall ever signing any
consent form.
for
massages to her back, she did not wear a bra.  this was her own decision as she
figured it would just get in the way.
she said
the defendant then began talking about different areas of her body.  he told
her that since women had wider hips, they sometimes had tension in their inner
thighs.  massaging her inner thighs, he said, may give her relief in her feet.
she agreed.
for this
massage, he instructed her to lie on her back with her legs bent and her feet
near her buttocks.  her knees then fell outward in what she called a butterfly
position.  her lower body would be draped, but the leg being worked on would be
exposed.  she said he would stand on the side of the exposed leg and massage
her inner thigh from above the knee up to her groin.
on at
least two occasions, she said his fingers went under the sheet and touched her
vagina.  she specifically recalled the first touch being to her labia and the
second being a “grazing” touch of her vaginal opening.  these were direct,
skin-to-skin touches as she did not believe she was wearing underwear at those
appointments.
after
these incidents, j.p. told the defendant she felt she no longer needed inner
thigh massages as her feet were feeling better.  the massages moved to her
upper body, primarily her upper back and shoulders.
the
defendant suggested that he might massage her ribs to help her with breathing
when she ran.  he called it “opening” the ribs.  he explained that she needed
to be on her back for this massage.  she testified that prior to this
suggestion, she had been on her stomach.  when she turned over, rather than
lift the sheet on the side opposite him, and thereby keep himself unable to see
her, he lifted it on his side.  she was, she believed, entirely visible as she
turned over.  when she was turned, he folded the sheet down to her hips,
exposing both her breasts.  she covered her breasts with her hands.  he asked
if she was comfortable, and she said no.  he gave her a small towel,
approximately 5” x 7”, to cover herself with.  he then proceeded to uncover one
breast at a time by folding the cloth over while he massaged her.  in
cross-examination she was shown a larger towel (30” x 16”) and it was suggested
that was the size of towel the defendant had used to cover her.  she disagreed.
as for the
massage itself, j.p. remembered it as a gentle manipulation of her breast
tissue.  it had nothing to do with her ribs or chest.  she said he massaged
each breast for about five minutes.  in cross-examination, she described the
massage as a two-handed cupping of her breast.  she also agreed she had used
the term “kneading like dough” when speaking with a.l. as she liked baking
bread and so the description was one that she could relate to.  she was clear
that in her mind, her discussion with a.l. did not influence the content of her
testimony.
after the
massage, j.p. went home and told a.l. what had happened.  a.l. told her that
she’d experienced the same kind of breast massage herself.  j.p. then disclosed
the vaginal touching.  both agreed they would not return to the defendant.  the
issue was a topic of conversation between them for the next couple of weeks.
in the
years that followed, j.p. continued to think about the incidents and whether
she should tell someone.  seeing media coverage about other complainants spurred
her to come forward.
j.p.’s
evidence, as it relates to counts 5 and 6, involve two unwanted vaginal touches
and one allegation of an unwanted breast massage.
the
inner thigh massages, which led to the allegations of vaginal touching, were
undertaken on the suggestion of the defendant.  he told her the pain in her
feet might be related to inner thigh tension.
the
butterfly position into which she said the defendant guided her gave him access
to her legs.  she testified that the sheet covering her lower body (save for
the leg being worked on) was not tucked in.  she said it was laid on her.  this
led to some physical space between the sheet and her body.  it was in this
space, she said, where the touching occurred.
her
memory of the touches is specific.  the first touch was described as a swipe to
her labia.  the second was a grazing touch not to the labia but to her vaginal
opening.  she agreed that both were brief and that neither led to penetration.
she did not say anything at the time as she wanted to believe they were accidents.
while she agreed there may have been discussions about consent related to the
inner thigh massage, there was “definitely not” any such discussion regarding
touching of her vagina.
j.p.
marked on a diagram the areas she said the defendant touched.
after
the massage with the touch of her vaginal opening, she told the defendant she
felt she didn’t need inner thigh massages anymore.  the appointments from that
point focused on her upper body.  it was then that he suggested massages to her
rib cage, to open her ribs and let her breathe better as a runner.
she
then described the massage where she said the breast touching took place.  that
portion of her evidence began with her rolling over from her stomach onto her back.
she testified that he held the sheet that had been covering her in such a way
that she thought he could see her.  when asked about her knowledge on that
point by crown counsel, she admitted that was only an assumption on her part.
after
she turned over, she said he folded the sheet down to expose her entire upper
body as noted above.  when she told him she wasn’t comfortable, he gave her a
small facecloth to cover her breasts.  she estimated the cloth to be about the
size of the bible that was on the witness stand.  i suggested it was
approximately 5” x 7” and both counsel agreed.  on that point, i have
difficulty accepting her evidence.  she went on to say that the cloth was used
to cover both breasts, and that the defendant would fold it over to expose one
breast at a time.  i’m not sure i understand how a cloth that size would be
large enough to cover both breasts successfully, with enough excess that it
needed to be folded over to expose one at a time.  i conclude that j.p. is
incorrect in her estimation of the cloth’s size.
it was
argued in submissions that i had misapprehended j.p.’s evidence in the similar
fact ruling.  i found she testified to the defendant uncovering both breasts
simultaneously, but counsel said her evidence did not bear that out.  having
reviewed her testimony, i can confirm i did not misapprehend her evidence.  she
did testify to the defendant exposing both breasts at once, as set out above.
while
the defendant did massage the muscles between her ribs when she was on her
stomach, she said there was no such massaging when she was on her back.
after
the breast massage incident, she said she discussed her experience with a.l.
she learned that a.l. had had a similar experience.  they made the decision to
cancel their upcoming appointments and stop seeing the defendant.  j.p. went
back and forth in her mind over whether to report the defendant to anyone, but
in the end chose not to.
in
cross-examination, j.p. confirmed her attendances at the clinic.  she said her
treatment began with foot massages and there was also discussion of the
defendant massaging her abdomen to help break up scar tissue from a
hysterectomy procedure.
regarding
the touching of the labia, she agreed she did not know what part of the
defendant’s hand made contact with her.  it could have been the side of his
hand, his palm, or one or more fingers.  as she was looking at the ceiling at
the time, she couldn’t see.
she was
asked about what was used to cover her breasts during the chest massage.  she
maintained it was a facecloth and estimated it to be 5”x7”.  counsel questioned
if such a cloth would be large enough to cover both breasts.  she said she just
remembered that it was a facecloth.  she was shown the 30”x16” towel that was
made an exhibit and denied the towel used to cover her chest was that size.
she was
asked specifically about how the idea of a chest massage came up and whether
she consented:
q.
and he suggested to you that he could massage the muscles in between your
ribcage?
a.
yes.
q.
and you know those to be the intercostal muscles?
a.
i do.
q.
and that’s from his explanation?
a.
yes.
q.
okay. okay. and he told you that sometimes the muscles in between your ribcage
get tight and constricted?
a.
correct.
q.
and it would be good to massage them to open them up, right?
a.
yep.
q.
and that can help with deeper breathing, right?
a.
yes.
q.
which can help with athletics?
a.
yes.
q.
and that’s why you agreed to the massage of the intercostal muscles?
a.
yes.
q.
okay. and also, in that discussion he told you he would essentially be
massaging the muscles in between your ribcage on your chest wall. and i’m going
to define “chest wall” for you okay? from your collarbone down to the base of
your ribcage into the – from your sternum basically to the side underneath your
armpits.
a.
it’s possible, but i don’t actually remember that conversation.
q.
okay. so, that – again, that could have happened, you just don’t remember?
a.
correct.
q.
and included in the chest wall is your breast tissue, right?
a.
sure.
q.
okay. and so, based on that conversation, the two of you very well could have
had a conversation that your breast tissue would have been touched for the
intercostal muscle massage?
a.
i don’t recall, but possibly.
q.
okay. so, it’s possible that you did consent and agree to that, correct?
a.
to having my breasts touched?
q.
yes.
a. possibly.
she
also said, as she did in her examination in chief, that she did not recall any
rib massaging when she was on her back.
it
appears that in cross-examination, j.p. for the first time referred to the
defendant’s actions in the chest massage as “cupping” her breast with his
hands.  she said he took her breast in his two hands and massaged like a loaf
of dough.
she
also acknowledged she could not remember if the defendant massaged the upper
portion of her chest, from her collarbone to the top of her breast.
j.p.
was asked in detail about her discussions with a.l.  she agreed they’d talked
as they’d had similar experiences with the defendant.  she consistently denied that
those conversations influenced her account in any way.  while she did discuss
with her new massage therapist that she’d been a client of the defendant, she
did not discuss the substance of the massages she received.  she also confirmed
she did not know or have any contact with any of the other complainants.
the
defendant testified about his dealings with j.p..
he
agreed she initially came to him with a complaint of foot pain.  after an
assessment, he came to the conclusion that the right side of her pelvis was out
of alignment and that this was causing her foot pain.  he said he explained
this to her and they agreed to his proposed treatment.  he also embarked on
treating her hysterectomy scar in an effort to promote “linear” scar tissue.
he said she agreed to all of this, including massage of her inner thighs and
hip flexors.
when
massaging the inner thighs, the defendant said he first loosened up the area
with lotion and gliding movements.  after that, he would move to myofascial
release techniques.  he said the leg he was treating was bent and that he put a
wedge-shaped block under it for support.  he said her other leg was relatively
straight during the first inner thigh massage, but that j.p. changed that other
leg’s position in subsequent massages.  she bent that leg also, essentially
mirroring the leg being worked on.  he put another wedge under that leg to
support it.
the
only part of her body that was uncovered at these times was the leg he was
working on.  the draping was tucked under her leg and hip.  during the portion
of the massage where he was using lotion, he estimated that he was moving his
hands at a rate of three to four glides on her leg per second.  he kept this up
for approximately ten minutes.  this would translate to between 1,800 and 2,400
glides on her inner thigh in that ten-minute period.  he denied any contact
with her genital area during this time.  at most, he suggested he may have made
contact with the draping, leading her to feel like she’d been touched.  he said
he had no intention of touching her genitals.
he was
also asked about massaging j.p.’s chest.  he said he suggested the intercostal
massage as she was a runner.  they discussed how he would go about the
“rib-springing” technique.  he told her it would involve touching her chest and
that he would make some contact with breast tissue.  he would stay away from the
fatty tissue of the breast, which either he or she would move out of the way.
he said she understood and agreed to the treatment.
as to
the massage itself, the defendant denied uncovering j.p.’s upper body after she
turned from her stomach to her back.  he said once she turned over, she was
covered by the sheet he was using.  he then explained how he replaced the sheet
with a towel.  the towel was placed near her neck.  he held the top of the
sheet and the bottom of the towel simultaneously.  he would pull both down,
leading the towel to take the place of the sheet.
with
the towel in place, he said he asked for permission to begin.  she gave it.  he
then undraped one side of her chest at a time by folding the towel over.  he
worked on the intercostal muscles.  he said he did touch breast tissue at the
top of the breast but avoided the fatty tissue.  at no time did he touch her
nipple area as he would not be able to access the intercostal muscles that
way.  he estimated that he massaged each side of her chest for approximately
ten minutes.  he denied ever using a cupping motion in touching j.p.’s breasts,
calling her evidence “completely inaccurate”.  he also disagreed that the
draping he used was ever loose or could have led to him being able to see
sensitive areas of her body.
in
cross-examination, the defendant denied instructing j.p. to put both legs in
what she called the butterfly position.  he maintained that was her idea.
later, however, he suggested it may well have been his suggestion:
q. no, but you
didn’t write notes, mr. young, about she went into the butterfly position
herself, she told me it was more comfortable; that was not in your notes.  this
whole conversation.
a. i remember i
had recollection of her just flipping into that position and putting her feet
together.
q. and…
a. i may have told
her that it might be comfortable that way, i don’t remember those specific
little details.
he
denied any breast massage as described by j.p.  he said there was no cupping or
kneading of breast tissue.
j.p.’s
evidence must be assessed in the context of the similar fact witnesses relevant
to her allegations.  she has alleged vaginal touching.  this was also alleged
by j.s. and a.r.  in particular, j.s. said the defendant touched her vagina
briefly while he was massaging her thigh.  this is especially similar to j.p.’s
testimony.  this similarity can be used in assessing j.p.’s credibility, and in
rebutting any defence of accidental touching.
likewise,
she has alleged improper massaging of her breasts.  a.r. and a.l. each made
similar complaints.  their evidence can be used in the same way as it relates
to this allegation.
the
defendant has denied any intentional touching of j.p.’s vagina and touching her
breasts in the way she described.  if i believe or have a reasonable doubt
based on his evidence, i must acquit him.  if i have no such doubt, i must be
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of his guilt based on evidence i accept.
dealing
first with the breast massage, the defendant has said he only ever massaged the
intercostal muscles of her rib cage.  to the extent that he ever touched breast
tissue, it was incidental.  he denied cupping her breasts in his hands or
kneading them.
i will
turn to the third stage of the w.d. test first as the conclusion i reach
obviates the need to address the first two stages.
j.p.
very candidly testified that she may well have consented to the defendant
touching her breasts in the course of the chest massage.  i have quoted that
portion of her evidence above.  the balance of her evidence suggests she did
not agree to the massage as she described, but i cannot ignore this part of her
testimony.  the crown must show beyond a reasonable doubt that the breast
touching was without her consent.  in the end, i find it is likely the touching
was indeed without her consent.  given her admission, however, i cannot make
that finding beyond a reasonable doubt.
as
well, the idea that he cupped each breast with both hands was something she did
not tell police.  on its own, this addition to her account may not have caused
me significant concern, but added to the potential consent issue, it
underscores my reasonable doubt.
on the
issue of breast touching, j.p. is tantamount to an extrinsic similar fact
witness.  while her evidence on that point has not been accepted beyond a
reasonable doubt, that does not mean it is entirely off the table.  she has
testified to conduct by the defendant that falls under a similar fact category
as set out in that ruling.  based on the law as set out in the “extrinsic witnesses”
section below, her testimony is still eligible for consideration as extrinsic
similar fact evidence if i accept it as accurate on a balance of
probabilities.  i have found it is likely the defendant touched her breasts as
she described without her consent.  i accept her evidence on this point as
being more likely than not, and so it will be included with other related
similar fact evidence when i assess the credibility and reliability of other
complainants.
turning
to the alleged vaginal touching, i reach a different conclusion.  in those
incidents, j.p. was clear there was no consent, and consent was not argued by
the defendant.  the defendant’s testimony was that the touching either never happened
or was accidental and through the draping that was in place.
i
cannot believe the evidence of the defendant.  his testimony as to any
potential contact with j.p.’s vagina was argumentative and often
non-responsive.  his memory of his own prior testimony seemed oddly unreliable,
as when he questioned the crown saying he testified to “quick” gliding
movements on j.p.’s thigh.  he had previously gone to some length to explain
just how fast the gliding movements had been (three to four per second for ten
minutes), but then didn’t remember he’d used the word “quick”?  this was
similar to his testimony where he didn’t recall suggesting the text records
with j.s. were possibly incomplete.  rather than a genuine failure of memory, i
find this was an attempt to obstruct the cross-examination.
his
testimony does not leave me with a reasonable doubt.  his explanation of
accidental touching through the draping is contradicted by j.p.  i remind
myself that a reasoned acceptance of contrary evidence beyond a reasonable
doubt is a sufficient basis for rejecting the defendant’s evidence (see:
r.
v.
j.j.r.d.
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca)
,
o.j. no. 4749 (c.a.)
).  in this case, i reject any
notion of accidental touching.  j.p. testified to two very clear incidents of
skin-to-skin touching to two different areas of her vagina.  his testimony does
not leave me in doubt.
i
accept the evidence of j.p. on the issue of vaginal touching.  her testimony
was clear and unshaken on cross-examination.  i found her to be a credible
witness who testified in a fair manner.  when she was not sure of something in
her evidence, she said so.  as an example, she testified to the defendant being
able to see her when she turned over on the massage table, but quickly added
that him seeing her was only her assumption.  her credibility is also strengthened
by the similar fact witnesses.  in the result, i find the crown has proved the
allegation of vaginal touching beyond a reasonable doubt.
in both
the similar fact application and the trial, the defendant has raised the
possibility of collusion between j.p. and a.l.  it was argued that both
witnesses should be viewed as less credible and reliable given the possibility
that they coordinated their testimony.  given my finding on j.p.’s allegation
of breast touching, which was the focus of the collusion argument, i give no
weight to the issue as it relates to j.p.  the remainder of her allegations
were specific to her and not similar to those made by a.l.  there is no basis
for finding that j.p.’s testimony resulted from collusion.  i will return to
this issue when i consider a.l.’s evidence.
the
defendant faces two counts related to j.p., counts 5 and 6.  the counts are
identical.  both allege sexual assault between 1 january and 31 december 2015.
the crown has not specifically said which incidents relate to which counts.  on
my view of the evidence, it seems clear the fairest way to deal with this issue
is to ascribe the breast touching to one count and the vaginal touching to the
other.  j.p. did testify to two different vaginal touching incidents, however,
and so conceivably each could be reflected in its own count.  given the crown
has not framed the counts in this way, i will interpret the evidence in a way
more favourable to the defendant.
in the
result, the defendant will be found guilty of count 5 and not guilty of count
6.
a.l.
a.l. also
saw the defendant at mifflin chiropractic in 2015.
ms. a.l.
was referred to the defendant by a neighbour.  she had been involved in a motor
vehicle collision in 2013 and suffered injury to her neck and upper back.  in
total, she saw the defendant for approximately six months in the spring and
summer of 2015, typically once per month.  she paid for the massages through
her wife’s work benefits.
while she
was primarily interested in getting her back and neck massaged, a.l. was an
athlete who had other areas of her body that also needed treatment from time to
time.  she testified that her athletic pursuits were something she and the
defendant hit it off about, and that they had easy conversations.
over the
course of their visits, the defendant told her that athletes often developed
tight rib cages from breathing heavily.  he told her he could massage the
muscles of her rib cage to help open them up.  while he could do this partially
from the back, he would also need to massage her chest and breasts.  she said
that during these massages, her upper body would be completely exposed.   her
breasts would be massaged and, she said, “kneaded”.  she soon determined in her
mind that this was not appropriate.  it did not feel to her like a tight muscle
was being treated as the massage did not follow the line of the ribs but was a
circular motion on breast tissue.  on the issue of consent, a.l. said she never
signed any consent to have her breasts massaged but did verbally consent to
having her rib cage massaged.  she confirmed he massaged the entire breast
area, including her nipples.
as she
started to feel uncomfortable with the defendant, she stopped booking
appointments.  she did agree that, aside from this issue, he was otherwise an
effective massage therapist.
her wife, j.p.,
was also a client of the defendant’s.  a.l. stated that she told j.p. about her
discomfort when she was deciding whether to continue with the defendant or
not.  she accompanied j.p. when she went to the police to give a statement.  at
first, a.l. had no intention of providing her own statement or getting involved
at all.  when police asked her, however, she changed her mind and did provide a
statement.
she
testified that after they gave their statements, she and j.p. talked on the way
home about how uncomfortable they were.  she said the content of her statement
was not influenced by anyone.
in
cross-examination, she was asked about her discussions with j.p.  she did not
know j.p. had also used the word “knead” in her police statement.  a.l.
conceded that they may have discussed the situation and possibly used that
common reference of kneading breast tissue like dough.  she confirmed that j.p.
had decided to go to police and that she went with her.  despite repeated
suggestions, she did not agree that their discussions had influenced her
memory, and thereby the content of her statement or testimony, about what
happened.
a.l.
testified that the massages to her rib cage did not seem to be addressing tight
muscles.  this is from her examination in chief:
a.
…it didn’t feel like the rest of a massage feels where you’re physically
treating a knot or treating a tight muscle. it just felt different.
q.
can you describe what you mean by it just felt different?
a.
uncomfortable. not like – not like uncomfortable like a pain, just it didn’t
feel like anything was being treated.  it more just felt like being taken
advantage of.
she
said the breast massages took place on at least two occasions, and estimated they
lasted 5-10 minutes.  prior to the defendant undertaking these massages, she said
they discussed the reason for massaging her rib muscles.  she agreed she gave
consent to that being done.  she did not consent, she said, to her breasts
being massaged.
she
agreed that conversation between them continued throughout the breast massages.
she
described the defendant’s actions at the relevant times.  she said she was
covered by a sheet, but that after they discussed the rib massage, he pulled
the sheet down.  he exposed her entire upper body.  she said he massaged one
breast at a time and that the other breast remained uncovered throughout.  the
massage involved the entire breast.  a.l. was asked about her rib muscles being
massaged at this time.  this exchange is also from her examination in chief:
q. when you agreed
to having your rib muscles massaged, in your mind what did having rib muscles
massaged mean?
a. i thought there
would be more direct pressure applied between my ribs, so obviously knowing
that my breasts are in the way of that. i thought it would be more methodical,
like starting at the top and working your way down throughout my ribcage and
there might be just a little bit of breast tissue touched, whereas that never
happened, it was always just massaging of the breasts.
q. were – do you
recall whether or not your ribs were massaged?
a. i’m going to
say yes just because they’re in that area, but it never felt like that was the
intention. when i was on my front and he was massaging my back, definitely you
can tell that – when those muscles are being intended and reached, and it
didn’t feel like that from the front.
q. sorry, i didn’t
get that. can you say that again? you said, when you were on your - how were
you laying?
a. so, when my
breasts are massaged, i’m laying on my back. but when, when i would lay on my
front and he would massage my back, like it’s – you can definitely tell when
your rib muscles are being massaged. like it’s a very firm pressure that’s
applied. when i was on my back and that same manipulation was supposed to be
happening to my ribs from the front, that’s not how it felt. it was just
centered on the breast area, and it wasn’t like a direct pressure, it was more
of a kneading. yeah.
q. were there –
when you were laying on your back, so with your breasts facing up or out, were
any part of your ribs massaged? so, that are not – that were not connected to
your breast; because i asked you that question and you said, well, i have to –
your answer was “i’m going to say yes because they’re in that area. never felt
that was the intention.” so, my question is, was there any part of your ribs,
that are not connected to your breasts, massaged when you were laying on your –
on your – laying on your back.
a. no.
q. and when i say
“connected”, meaning that you can – you can get to without touching breast
tissue?
a. no.
a.l.
was asked what areas of her breasts were massaged by the defendant.  she
explained that it was the entirety of both breasts, including the nipples and
areolas.  she was given a drawing of a breast to indicate what areas were
massaged, and circled the entire thing.
crown
counsel asked a.l. about the defendant’s draping of her body when she would
move from faceup to facedown.  she said she had no issue with his conduct on
that point.  she also testified that he helped her with the issues she brought
to him.
in
cross-examination, a.l. described the motion the defendant used when massaging
her breasts.  rather than a “linear” motion that went along her ribs, she said
the defendant moved his fingers in a firm, circular motion.  as stated in the
summary above, she likened it to dough being kneaded.
counsel
put her police statement to her.  when asked by police to describe how the
defendant massaged her breast, a.l. said he was “definitely acting like he was
trying to get to the deeper tissue”.  when asked if he ever worked on her rib
cage, she answered yes.  in her testimony, a.l. agreed that it did seem like he
was trying to get to deeper tissue, but said he never worked on any of the
intercostal region above, below, or beside her breasts.  it was always only on the
breast tissue.  she clarified her affirmative answer to whether he ever worked
on her rib cage by saying she was referring to his work while she was on her
stomach.  in that position, she said, he did work on her ribs on the back side
of her body.
she agreed
she never used the word “circular” when describing the defendant’s hand
movements to police.  she said that to her, kneading is done in a circular
motion.  she did use the word kneading in her statement, but did not used the
adjective circular.  her evidence is that a circular motion is part and parcel
of a kneading motion.
on
further cross-examination, a.l. confirmed she did not voice any discomfort with
the defendant at the time of her massages, and agreed he would not have known
anything was wrong.  she also agreed his touch of her nipples was brief and
part of the overall breast massage.  that is, he did not focus on touching the
nipple area.
the
defendant also testified as to his dealings with a.l..
he said
she came to him with upper back, neck, and shoulder pain as a result of her
work in a hardware store.  she spent a lot of time at a computer and so had
some stiffness.  they discussed her needs and potential treatment.
regarding
massage of her intercostal muscles, he said it may have been a.l. who first
suggested it.  he said they discussed the nature of intercostal work and he
told her it could be, in his words, invasive and tender.  he said he explained
he would be touching the front chest wall, sometimes making contact with breast
tissue.  he offered her the choice between working through a sheet or directly
on her skin.  he said she indicated to him that she was “completely comfortable
with me working directly on the skin and having her undraped.”
on the
issue of who first suggested intercostal massage, a.l. said it was the
defendant who recommended the treatment to help with her athletic performance.
in cross-examination, it was put to her that the defendant offered an
intercostal massage.  it was never suggested to her that it may have been her
idea.  again, this is important as it goes to the nature of the chest massage
and a.l.’s state of mind when it happened.  i note that in cross-examination,
the defendant himself agreed intercostal massage was his idea.
the
defendant described the chest wall massage performed on a.l.  he said her upper
body was draped with a towel.  he undraped only the side he was working on.  he
said he got her permission to move the towel before he did so.  he worked on
the front and side of her rib cage.  he said he worked around the fatty tissue
of the breast to get at the muscle underneath.  when he needed to move her
breast out of the way so he could access the tissue, he said he got her
permission.  he denied any contact with her nipples, saying that area was “off
limits”.  when he finished the first side, he said he re-draped it and moved to
the other side.
he was
asked if a.l. expressed any discomfort with this massage:
q. okay. all right. a.l. said that - never
mind. okay, and did she express any discomfort to you at all or being
uncomfortable in any way?
a. no, she was the opposite. she was
engaging and she was encouraging me to continue it, and it wasn't too painful
for her. i was constantly checking in with her and we were in regular
conversation throughout the whole time.
according
to him, not only was a.l. comfortable with what he was doing but she was
actually encouraging him to continue.
he
testified that the chest massage performed on a.l. was the same as the one he
did on j.p.  in that description, he discussed beginning with superficial
layers of the intercostal muscle and gradually working deeper into the tissue.
he compared it to toffee, where it might first feel firm but eventually soften
up with manipulation.
he said
that while he may not have had written consent for the touching inherent in the
intercostal massages, he did have ongoing verbal consent from a.l..
in
summary, the defendant has denied any inappropriate touching of a.l.’s
breasts.  he testified that at all times she was appropriately covered and that
his touching of her chest area was only ever focused on reaching the
intercostal muscles.  at times, this required moving breast tissue out of the
way, but he said he always had her permission to do that.  he said she was a
willing and encouraging participant in this treatment.
as with
the other complainants, i remind myself that a.l.’s evidence is supported by
the other witnesses as categorized in the similar fact ruling.  a.l.’s
similarities are that 1) she presented as athletic, 2) she alleged her breasts
were inappropriately touched, 3) she received a massage that did not accord
with the explanation she was given, and 4) she was draped improperly at certain
times.  on all these points, other complainants have made very similar
allegations.  this can benefit a.l. in my credibility assessment, it can reduce
the likelihood of innocent, accidental conduct, and it can strengthen the
crown’s evidence as to the actus reus of the offence charged.  as i have said,
however, it is not a ticket to automatic acceptance of her evidence as proof of
the charged offence.
i
cannot accept the defendant’s evidence on the first stage of the w.d. test.  he
contradicted himself on who first suggested intercostal massage.  taking his
evidence in totality and viewing it against the backdrop of all the evidence in
this case, i find i do not believe his account.
further,
his denials of improper touching and claims of consent and appropriate draping
do not raise a reasonable doubt in my mind.  taking into consideration the
frailties i have already mentioned, and viewing his evidence as a whole keeping
the ratio
in
j.j.r.d.
,
supra
, in mind, i find it does not meet
the second stage of the w.d. test.
i found
a.l. to be a very straightforward witness.  she admitted without hesitation
that the defendant was a talented therapist who addressed her issues.  she did
not attempt to shade her evidence to the defendant’s detriment.  even when
testifying to her breasts being touched, she acknowledged that he likely did
touch some intercostal muscle at the same time.  her evidence was frank and
unvarnished.
i return
now to the issue of collusion with j.p..
a.l.
has complained of incidents where the defendant touched her breasts.  she
described a pressing motion with his hand that moved all over the entirety of
her breasts, including her nipples.  she agreed he did not use a cupping
motion.  she testified that his movements were like kneading dough and were in
a circular direction.  she said both breasts were uncovered when this was
happening.
j.p.
also testified to a kneading motion being used on her breasts, both of which
were exposed.  but that is essentially where the similarities end.  she denied
any contact with her nipples.  she did allege a cupping motion, unlike a.l.  she
said he offered her a washcloth to cover her breasts.  she also made a separate
allegation about vaginal touching, again unlike a.l..
i agree
that both witnesses using the same simile might appear unusual and worthy of
further attention.  considering all the surrounding circumstances, however,
including that the two witnesses are married and live together, i am not unduly
troubled by their shared used of the word.  it does not prevent me from
accepting a.l.’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.  i adopt my reasoning as
set out in paragraphs 193-200 of the similar fact ruling on this point.
i find
as a fact the defendant touched a.l.’s breasts in a manner that went beyond any
consent she may have given.  i accept a.l.’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt
and find the crown has proven count 7.  the defendant will be found guilty.
a.r.
ms. a.r.
saw the defendant several times at mifflin chiropractic.
ms. a.r.
saw the defendant professionally for less than a year, from 2014 – 2015.  she
was referred to him by co-workers at her place of employment.  she’d never been
to a registered massage therapist before seeing the defendant.  she saw him
because of some neurological issues she’d been having, like numbness and pain
in her back and legs.
regarding
her clothing during massages, a.r. said the defendant first told her to remove
her shirt and that massaging would be easier if she wasn’t wearing pants.  at
first, she would remove her shirt and bra but wear pants like tights.   in her
words, that “progressed” to her eventually not wearing anything.  she would
instead be covered with a small towel.  she testified that when she would lie on
her stomach, she would have only a small towel about the size of a piece of
printer paper covering her buttocks.
she said
the defendant recommended that he massage her breasts to assist in what he
termed “lymphatic drainage” and to address toxins.  she said she accepted his
professional opinion and agreed.  he would massage her breasts and chest area.
she did not recall if initially both breasts were exposed at once or only the
breast being massaged at the time, but said ultimately both were exposed at the
same time.  she said they would be exposed for the duration of the massage,
which was 30 – 90 minutes.  he would stand behind her and massage very close to
the nipple.  as she said, “pretty much my breast”.  while she had no specific
memory of him ever massaging her nipples, she did recall times where he would
stand behind her and massage both breasts at once.
she was
asked about him massaging her particular areas of concern, such as her arms or
legs.  she testified that he would always do a full-body massage and that there
were occasions when he would run out of time and not be able to get to the
areas she had mentioned.
on her
last visit to the defendant, she recalled lying on her back.  he was massaging
her abdomen when, with a finger, he began rubbing her clitoris.  she said this
went on long enough for her to realize what was happening and that he’d crossed
a boundary.  she left and never booked another massage or communicated with him
again.  she did not return his texts and blocked his number.  he tried to
contact her over social media using multiple accounts, both during the period
of her massages and afterwards.
she also
mentioned him inviting her to a local restaurant for vegan food, and asking her
to stay after an evening massage to chat and eat with him.  she felt these were
odd suggestions that also crossed boundaries.
while a.r.
did not recall signing consent forms when she started seeing the defendant, she
did agree he performed an assessment to determine her treatment plan.  she
agreed she would consent to areas of need being treated, and that she would
tell him on each visit which areas she wanted treated.
as
noted above, her level of clothing during massages gradually changed.
ultimately, she would be entirely unclothed and covered only by a blanket or
towel.  the towel was quite small and was used to cover her buttocks.
on
every occasion, to help with what the defendant called lymphatic drainage, he
would massage a.r.’s breasts.  as she’d never been to a massage therapist
before, she was accepting his professional opinion that this was necessary and
beneficial.  she said at first one breast at a time was exposed but that it
progressed to both being exposed for the entire massage.
a.r.
drew on a diagram the areas of her breast that were touched.  the diagram was
made an exhibit on the trial.  she circled nearly the entire breast, excluding
the nipple.  when asked if he’d touched her nipple, she said, “i don’t recall
so that’s why i did not do that”.
she had
no memory of discussing consent to a breast massage but did recall the
defendant telling her the benefits of lymphatic drainage.  while she felt
uncomfortable with being uncovered, she said she didn’t say anything as she was
going along with what she thought he felt was best.
the
last massage she received from the defendant took place at night.  she didn’t
recall if he massaged her breasts on that occasion but said it was “typical”
that he would.  she said that appointment included a pelvic massage that
progressed to the rubbing of her clitoris with his finger.  she could not
recall if her breasts were exposed at that time.  the massage ended after that.
she testified to feeling violated and taken advantage of.
she
said she and the defendant communicated over text regarding appointments.
during massages, they would discuss her work, vegan food, and her ongoing
health concerns.  she said he messaged her and tried to add her on various
social media platforms but she did not accept his invitations.  eventually, she
blocked his number.
in
cross-examination, a.r. agreed her belief in when she started and stopped
seeing the defendant was based on texts in her phone.  she began seeing him in
the fall of 2014.  she denied she’d only seen the defendant for a month but
agreed it was possible she had a total of only nine treatments.  she said she’d
texted with someone in april 2015 about feeling uncomfortable and it was based
on that text that she deduced she stopped seeing him in may.  she estimated her
entire time seeing the defendant was five or six months.
she
agreed they went through a health history at her first appointment, but did not
remember everything that was discussed.  she could not say for certain that she
told him about her back or neck pain, or about digestive issues.  she agreed
she did not have a specific recollection of that first meeting.  she did not
remember him mentioning lymphatic drainage or john barnes myofascial release at
the first meeting, though she did recall hearing the term myofascial.
she was
asked about their discussions regarding lymphatic drainage.  she remembered it
being discussed but said she simply trusted his professional opinion on whether
it would be beneficial to her.  she agreed she knew one breast at a time would
be exposed, and that some parts of her breast tissue might be massaged.
further, she agreed they may have discussed her breasts being exposed but she
didn’t recall.
she
agreed she could not say the chest wall massage was non-consensual and could
not say he did not inform her of the reasons for that massage.
regarding
the clothing she wore, she agreed she did not tell police that in the beginning
she wore either jeans or tights.  she differentiated between the early massages
and the later ones.  her concern, she said, centred on the massages where she
said she was naked.
on that
point, she said the defendant encouraged her not to wear underwear during
massages as it would make his work easier.  again, she trusted his professional
judgment and stopped wearing them.
on the
issue of the lymphatic drainage massages, she agreed that he likely asked for
permission to undrape her breast at the beginning, but as the sessions
continued, he may have just done it without asking.  she wasn’t sure about that
point.  a point she was sure about was that there were times, in later
massages, when both her breasts were exposed at the same time.
a.r.
confirmed she consented to the massage of her legs as this was an area she
specifically wanted treated.  that consent extended to her inner thighs to the
extent that he felt it was necessary in his opinion.  she agreed the inner
thigh massage never extended to her vaginal area.  in addition, the massage of
her lower abdomen was also done with her consent.
she was
asked about the massage she said led to the rubbing of her clitoris.  she
believed she was not draped with a sheet, but based that belief only on the
progression of draping she experienced; that is, she was draped with less and
less as the appointments went on.  she had no specific recollection of how she
was draped at that final massage.
she was
asked about her statement to police, given on 28 october 2021.  she agreed the
statement did not include allegations that both breasts were exposed at the
same time, or that she was ever improperly draped.  her evidence of the towel
covering her buttocks, and of him standing behind her and touching both breasts
at once, were points she only remembered close to the trial date.
it was
also put to her that in her statement she said only that the defendant touched
her clitoris, not that he rubbed it.  she responded as follows:
a. okay. i’m sorry for not being so
specific.
q. do you agree with that?
a.
but
it
was
–
like
he
rubbed
it
because
it
was
there for a while. so, i – i don’t know. rubbing, touching – what – what’s the
difference?
q. well….
a. it’s my clitoris and i’m in a massage
chair right now.
q. okay. so….
a. so, i’m sorry. like – it’s a – like i’m
not, like i’m
in
a
setting
where
your
clitoris
should
not
be
touched
period, so i don’t know why i should
justify what kind of touching.
she
agreed that she didn’t say anything at the time of this incident.  she said she
was in shock, and afterwards too uncomfortable to confront him.
in his
testimony, the defendant said a.r. started seeing him in november 2014.  she
had been referred by s.d.’s mother.  he maintained their therapeutic
relationship lasted only into december of that year.
a.r.
testified to being referred to the defendant by her co-workers.  when asked if
she knew s.d. by the crown, she said no.  i suspect the defendant may simply be
mistaken in how it was a.r. came to see him.  i take nothing from this possible
error in his evidence.
he said
she presented with a large number of complaints he called “nonsensical”.  in
using that term, he said he meant they did not follow a regular pattern.  these
included neurological pain in her arms and legs, and digestive issues.  she was
concerned she suffered from als.  he understood she had a diagnosed mental
illness.
as a
result of the diffuse nature of her complaints, he said he arrived at a
treatment plan that encompassed her whole body.  she was in agreement with this
approach.  it included giving attention to her lymphatic system.  he told her
there would be massages to her chest wall and that he would be in contact with
her breast tissue.  as well, he would massage her abdomen and glutes.  he said
she consented to all of this.
when he
massaged the chest wall, which he said was for an impingement of the pec minor
muscle as well as lymphatic drainage, he said he would first seek permission to
undrape one side of her chest.  when finished, he would re-drape and do the
same on the other side.  he denied a.r.’s claim that both her breasts were
exposed at any one time.  he also denied ever standing behind her and massaging
both breasts at once, and leaving her breasts uncovered while performing
massages of other areas.
he was
asked about the abdominal massages he performed.  he said a.r. would be covered
with a sheet on her lower body and a towel on her chest.  her torso would be
exposed, from approximately her belly button to her rib cage.  after again
asking for permission, he would begin with gliding techniques to soften the
area.
he said
his hand would be 1-2” above the pubic bone, which he estimated to be 1-2”
above a.r.’s clitoris.  he denied ever touching or rubbing that part of her
body.  he offered that his wrist may have touched the draping, leading to a.r.
feeling like she was being touched.  at no point did he ever touch her vaginal
area.
finally,
he testified that after she stopped being his client, he did not text her or
reach out to her in any way to get her to return.
when
asked in cross-examination about a.r.’s claim that there were times she asked
for a certain area to be treated and it wasn’t, he said she either didn’t remember
or simply didn’t understand the treatment he was providing.  the lymphatic
drainage techniques, he said, could be useful in treating her random pains.
he said
he asked for consent to perform lymphatic drainage directly on her skin, which
he said was necessary.  he said she consented to removing her pants and shirt.
he
denied that she was ever covered only with a small towel.  when on her stomach,
he said she was covered with a twin sheet.  when on her back for lymphatic
drainage, he would only undrape the side on which he was working.  he was asked
about touching breast tissue during this portion of the massage and said it
would only be to the extent necessary as the lymph nodes were not in the breast
tissue.
at that
point, despite having referred to breast tissue throughout his testimony, the
defendant then suggested the very definition of “breast tissue” was subjective:
q. would her
nipple be exposed?
a. it was, she was
undraped.  one whole side of her chest was undraped so her whole breast and nipple
on one side was exposed when i was doing that treatment.
q. and when you
say nowhere near the nipple, what do you mean by that?
a. i’m not doing
lymphatic drainage on breast tissue.
q. just around it.
a. as good as i
can, yes.  it depends on what you’re defining as breast tissue, everyone has
their own definition of exactly what their breast tissue is.
q. well, how do
you define it?
a. i don’t define
it; it’s defined by the client.
i’m
not sure what to make of this statement.  the notion of what is and isn’t
breast tissue, and more broadly what is and isn’t an appropriate area for a
massage therapist to touch, is central to this trial.  i don’t see how the
defendant, with the knowledge and experience he has emphasized repeatedly, can suddenly
disavow any objective knowledge of what constitutes breast tissue.
lastly,
he denied the evidence given by a.r. in re-examination.  he denied inviting her
to a local restaurant and denied asking her to remain after a massage so they
could continue talking and eat together.
a.r.’s evidence
is hampered by her lack of clear memory on several points.  for example, she
had an uneven recall of their first meeting, and didn’t remember if he told her
about the additional training he had in myofascial release.  her memory of her
statement to police was lacking at times.
i must
consider if these deficiencies in memory extend to core issues or only to
peripheral matters.  certainly, the entirety of a witness’s evidence must be
taken into account when determining their credibility and reliability.  but,
not all memory lapses are created equal.  if they relate to central, crucial
points, they can and likely should give a trier of fact significant pause.  if
they relate to secondary, collateral issues, they may more easily be chalked up
to the passage of time or innocent forgetting.  it is for the trier of fact to
determine where the evidence lies on that spectrum.
i have
already noted the other witnesses who complained of breast touching and vaginal
touching.  j.p. and a.l. both complained of unwanted breast touching.  like a.r.,
both said that contact came as a result of the defendant suggesting a
particular type of massage.  in their case, it was intercostal massage while in
a.r.’s case it was lymphatic drainage.  i have found the conduct to be
sufficiently similar that the evidence of j.p. and a.l. can be used to bolster
the credibility and reliability of a.r..
j.s.
and j.p. also complained of unwanted vaginal touching.  all said it came when
the defendant was massaging a nearby area.  j.s. and j.p. said the touches were
brief, while a.r. said it wasn’t long but it was long enough to realize what
was happening.
on both
points, the similar fact evidence can rebut the defence of accident, assist in
proving the actus reus of the offence, and can enhance the credibility of a.r..
for
reasons specific to his evidence about a.r. and for reasons related to his
evidence in general, i find i do not believe the defendant’s denials.  again,
he suggested that he may have accidentally contacted a.r.’s vaginal area
through the movement of the sheet that was covering her.  this is the same
suggestion he made as to how other complainants’ vaginal areas were touched.
the notion that someone who is otherwise so careful and methodical in his work
would accidentally (if indirectly) touch the vaginal areas of multiple women
does not follow common logic.  i remind myself that the defendant is under no
obligation to provide an explanation of any sort.  when he does, however, that
explanation becomes part of his evidence.  the plausibility of it is an
appropriate consideration in my assessment of his credibility.
his
denial of using a small cloth to cover a.r.’s buttocks is belied by the similar
fact witnesses who also complained of small cloths being used to cover their
bodies.  again, pursuant to
j.j.r.d
.,
supra
, an acceptance of
contrary evidence is a sufficient basis for rejecting the defendant’s
evidence.  i accept the evidence of the complainants who said the defendant
used a facecloth to cover them at various times in their massages.  that no
facecloths were ever seen by dr. mifflin does not mean they were not there.
while i do think j.p. was incorrect in her estimate of the cloth’s size, her
evidence that it was a very small cloth is clear.  i accept the evidence of
those complainants on this issue, and reject the defendant’s denials.
i am
also not left with a reasonable doubt by his evidence regarding a.r.  i make
this finding based on the same reasons i do not believe his evidence.  despite
the bar being lower at this stage of the w.d. test, i come to the same
conclusion.  i am especially troubled by the defendant’s sudden claim that the
definition of breast tissue is variable and entirely subjective.  as i said, the
inappropriate touching of some complainants’ breasts is a central issue in this
case.  suddenly saying he doesn’t even know how a person defines breast tissue
is, respectfully, preposterous.
a.r.’s
memory as to certain aspects of her dealings with the defendant was not
entirely clear.  she did not recall what was said at their first appointment.  in
her last massage, where she alleges he touched her clitoris, she did not recall
any discussions about consent.  she did not recall what she was wearing during
that massage or how she was draped.  she did not have an independent memory of
when she stopped seeing the defendant.  there were aspects of her testimony
that were not included in her statement to police.
on that
last point, a.r. agreed she did not tell police she wore either jeans or tights
for her first massages.  it was suggested to her that if she had done that she
would have told police.  she responded that the early massages weren’t the
problem and she didn’t focus on them.  the important part, she said, came
later.  i do not put any weight on a.r. not telling police about her clothing
in the early massages.  i accept those appointments did not stand out to her.
she did
not recall telling police that the touching of her breasts was a pushing and
massaging motion.  in my view, while she may not have recalled using those
specific words, her testimony on the breast touching conveyed the same sort of
motion.  she described massaging and times where the pressure was firm.  i
don’t see an issue with her not remembering that she used the word “pushing” in
her statement.
there
were other areas of her testimony that were not included in her statement that
give me more concern.  she did not tell police about the defendant only
covering her buttocks with a small towel.  indeed, she did not mention any
draping issues to police at all, including her claim that both breasts were
exposed at the same time.
when
asked about these omissions, a.r. said some aspects of her massages only came
back to her memory recently.  she said she suffered from anxiety and
post-traumatic stress disorder.  this is from her cross-examination:
ms.
santarossa: q. all right. okay. and again, when you gave your statement to the
police, you knew you were meant to be truthful?
a.
yes, but i also don’t remember everything. so, when i’m going in there i’m
obviously under stress, and i remembered everything i can at that time. it’s
not that i wasn’t being truthful, it’s that i just didn’t remember everything
at that time. it’s been – it wasn’t last week this happened. it’s been since
2015.
q.
right. so, are these memories just coming to you right now then?
a.
there’s a lot of things that have just come – like some things have just come
to me. like there was a few things that have just come to me within the last
little while. and i’m sorry that’s kind of how things happen. like, when
someone experiences trauma or any type of issue, it – they’re not supposed to
remember everything at once. like, i work in health care. like people get
flashbacks. things just start to – they just start to recall things.
q.
in relation to the allegation where both breasts were exposed, that is
something that just came to you at this trial?
a.
because i remember – not at this trial, but within the last little while, like
i remember having them exposed and feeling uncomfortable about that because i
remember them not being covered at times.
q.
and is that a flashback that you had?
a.
yes.
q.
all right. so, essentially ten years go by and then you remember it in the last
little while?
a.
yes. there’s things called ptsd, you know, like flashback [audio cut out]….
a.r.
was then asked specifically about not mentioning the towel on her buttocks to
police:
q.
okay. my question was, in relation to the towel, you remember that the first
time at around this trial?
a.
no, i remembered it for a bit, i just – you know, i don’t know – when you’re
giving a statement, to remember everything on top of like with covid going on
and then – there was just a lot going on. i tried to give whatever i could. i
have anxiety, so this is part of the reason why i’m in this room right now.
like i can’t possibly remember everything, and to even ask that of someone who
experienced it in 2015, that’s a lot. if this
was
last year, sure, that’s different, but this has been a long time and i’m doing
– there’s points that i remember significantly and i’ve mentioned those points,
and i think those are quite significant.
one
area where a.r.’s testimony was clear dealt with the areas of her breasts that
were touched.  she noted on the diagram where she said the defendant touched
her.  she circled almost the entire breast, but did not circle the nipple.  she
said in her examination in chief that she did not recall him touching her nipple
so she did not want to include that in the circles.  in cross-examination she
confirmed this testimony and disagreed that her memory on this point was not
very good.
she was
also clear in her cross-examination that she remembered, despite this not being
in her statement to police, the defendant standing behind her and touching both
breasts at the same time.
assessments
of credibility and reliability can be among the most difficult tasks a trier of
fact must accomplish.  as justice shaw said in
r.
v.
r.c.
o.j. no. 3323 (s.c.j.)
at paragraph 60
:
assessing a witness' reliability and
credibility is not a science. as we instruct juries, there is no magic formula
in deciding how much or little to believe of a witness' evidence. we are to be
guided by our common sense and experience in human affairs.
the
trauma that attends some events in a person’s life can wreak havoc on their
memory.  it can cause lapses in memory, as noted by justice presser in
r.
v.
eze
o.j. no. 379 (s.c.j.)
at paragraph 54
:
j.k. explained her memory gaps by saying
that the assaults occurred a long time before trial and that they were very
upsetting and dramatic for her. she acknowledged that her memory of
the details of the assaults was not great because the incidents were traumatic
for her. she did not talk about the assaults every day, and had wanted to try
to forget what happened to her. j.k. candidly acknowledged that, given the
passage of time and her trauma, her memory was fading. however,
j.k. explained that the transcript of her police statement and the
surveillance video refreshed her memory. and she adamantly maintained that
she did remember that she was sexually assaulted in the washroom.
the
court of appeal for ontario considered trauma and its effect on memory in the
case of
r.
v.
g.m.c.
2022 onca 2
at paragraphs
38-40
.  chief
justice strathy (as he then was) stated:
after his general observations with respect to the assessment of evidence, the
trial judge simply expressed some propositions, grounded in common experience,
that are familiar to every trial judge and lawyer and to lay people. although
he used different language, i would express these as:
--
observations made by witnesses in the course of traumatic events can be
difficult to recall and to describe accurately at a later date;
-- a
witness cannot be expected to have a faithful memory of minor incidents that
occurred during a traumatic event and the inability to recall a minor or
insignificant event does not detract from the witness's overall reliability or
credibility; [page573]
--
it is human nature to try to make sense out of bits and pieces of memories
about an event, and this may impact the accuracy of a witness's testimony
concerning events; and
-- a
child caught up in a conflict between his father and his father's partner is
likely to have conflicting loyalties and a judge should be cautious of
accepting the child's recollection, recounted several years later, about events
that may not have been particularly significant to the child at the time.
although dressed up in unnecessarily scientific jargon, the trial judge's
application of these common experiences does not reflect error in his
assessment of the evidence.
i would dismiss this ground of appeal.
in my
view, this statement from the court of appeal directly addresses a.r.’s memory
issues and the omissions of certain aspects of her dealings with the defendant
from her police statement.  consequently, the gaps in her memory and later
recall of certain conduct do not lead me to question her overall credibility or
reliability.  i find a.r. was doing her best to tell the truth about incidents
from several years earlier.  she was cross-examined vigorously and
appropriately.  that cross-examination brought out the issues i’ve mentioned
above.  taking the entirety of her evidence into account, i find her to have
been a credible witness.  was her recall of events perfect?  no, it wasn’t.
but that isn’t the test.  i must only concern myself with whether the crown has
proved the counts related to a.r. beyond a reasonable doubt.
i find
as a fact that the defendant did touch a.r.’s breasts in a manner divorced from
any sort of therapeutic approach.  i accept her evidence that he massaged her
breasts, sometimes one at a time and sometimes both at once.  while she agreed
to a massage for what she was told was lymphatic drainage, the touching went
far beyond the location of the axillary lymph nodes and included almost the
entirety of her breasts.
i also
accept a.r.’s evidence that the defendant touched her clitoris in the context
of an abdominal massage.  her evidence on this point was clear and entirely
unshaken.  while she may have had difficulty remembering other specifics of
their meetings, she was consistent on this point.
like j.p.,
a.r.’s allegations are reflected in two counts in the information.  while not
specifically delineated by the crown, i find i can ascribe the breast touching
to count 8 and the vaginal touching to count 9.  the defendant will be found
guilty of both counts.
s.d.
ms. s.d.
testified to a single encounter with the defendant.
in 2015,
ms. s.d. was a triathlete.  she had received massages as part of her training
in the past, but her usual massage therapist was very busy, so she was looking
for others.  she received a gift certificate from her mother for mifflin
chiropractic for christmas in 2014 and booked an appointment with the
defendant.  she only ever visited him once.
at the
time, she did not have any specific issue to address.  she was training hard in
2015 and so “was always sore”.
when she
went to mifflin, the clinic was closed.  she knocked on the door and the
defendant let her in.  after discussing her health history, the massage began.
she said the gift certificate was for a one-hour massage but that it ended up
being close to three hours.  she did not recall signing or discussing anything
related to consent to treatment.
for the
massage, she kept her underwear on.  she testified to being concerned about how
she was draped.  when on her stomach, her back was uncovered.  her legs were
covered but she said he would uncover her leg and, she felt, her buttocks.  she
could feel her underwear being moved so that he could massage her glute
muscles.  he would pull the underwear up on the side where he was working and
tuck the sheet under it, exposing the leg and glute.
later in
the massage, she rolled over onto her back.  at this point, her breasts were
covered only with a small washcloth.  he massaged between her breasts, putting
his hand under the cloth.  while her memory was cloudy, she testified that he
must surely have seen her breasts given how small the cloth was and the nature
of the massage.  she did not recall any conversation with the defendant prior
to him starting the chest massage.
he also
massaged her stomach area.  this made her uncomfortable as he massaged down to
the area of her pubic hair.  again, she had no memory of discussion about why
he was massaging her there, or about her consent to that treatment.
also while
on her back, she said he would uncover her leg and stretch it out to the side.
she felt she was not draped properly and was concerned that he could see her
vaginal area given the position she was in.
s.d. also
noted what she felt was inappropriate conversation from the defendant during
the massage.  he told her how he had gotten in shape, but that his wife was
overweight and not supportive of him.  it struck her as odd and inappropriate
that he would talk about his spouse like that with someone he’d just met.
after the
massage was complete, the defendant booked s.d.’s next appointment.  while she
let him do this, she had no intention of ever going back.
once she
saw a media report about the defendant, she made the decision to speak to
police.  she further testified that well after giving that statement, she spoke
with k.m. about what had happened.  ms. k.m. was a named complainant in this
case but the charge involving her was stayed by the court.  s.d. knew k.m from
the local running community.  she knew k.m had encountered an issue with a
massage therapist but did not know it was the defendant until the media report
came out and k.m posted about it on social media.  it was at that point that s.d.
made the connection.
she was
clear that her discussions with k.m did not influence her testimony or police
statement.
in cross-examination,
she denied the defendant discussed the massaging of her rib cage, intercostal
muscles, or abdomen.  she strongly denied agreeing to any such massage.  she
was shown a larger towel, approximately 30” x 16” and it was suggested to her
that was the size of towel that covered her chest.  she disagreed.
she was
also asked about her messages with lindsay cole, another massage therapist.
those messages were exchanged on 1 and 2 november 2021.  in those messages,
days before she provided her statement to police, s.d. asked ms. cole if she
remembered talking about the defendant several years earlier.  in her messages
she said:
i had a massage by
him a long time ago and i felt like it was super inappropriate.  he worked in
dr mifflin’s office.  i thought i had talked to you about it.  maybe it wasn’t
you.  i’m just trying to remember some of the details.
the final
messages in the exchange were s.d. telling her that other women had come
forward and providing a link to a news article about the defendant being
charged.
she was
asked, not unreasonably, about saying she was “trying to remember some of the
details”.  it was put to her that she needed help remembering what happened
because she actually had a poor memory of events.  she disagreed and offered
context for the messages.
she said
ms. cole had initially discouraged her from reporting the defendant’s conduct
at the time of the massage.  she wanted to let ms. cole know that the defendant
had been charged criminally.  in essence, her messages to ms. cole were
something of an “i told you so”.  she denied having any difficulty remembering
what happened to her.
i would
note that despite not receiving any “details” from ms. cole, s.d. provided her
statement to police two days later where she disclosed what she said the
defendant did.  while i agree that on the face of it, her message seems to
betray a lack of memory, her subsequent statement to police and denials of
memory problems in her testimony mean that, at this stage at least, i am not
unduly concerned about her recall.
also in
cross-examination, s.d. was questioned extensively on her discussions with k.m.
she again stated that while they had discussed what happened, k.m had not
influenced her own account.  she agreed some of k.m’s accusations were similar
to hers but noted that her own incident took place years before k.m’s.  at no
point did they ever compare stories.
in an
agreed statement of facts, the court was advised that following her testimony, s.d.
messaged k.m and told her she’d been asked questions in court about the contact
they’d had with each other.  k.m advised the victim witness assistance program,
who told the crown.  at the time, k.m was still a potential crown witness.  s.d.’s
contact with k.m was in violation of the witness exclusion order i made at the
outset of this trial.  it also went against the direction given to s.d. by
police at the time of her statement that she should not speak to any of the
other complainants.
on
meeting the defendant, s.d. said he seemed knowledgeable and appeared to like
having athletic clients.
she
said the massage began with her on her stomach.  she had concerns about how she
was draped and felt her buttocks were exposed to an unnecessary degree.  she
said her legs would be uncovered one at a time and the sheet tucked into her
underwear.  she said her buttocks cheek would be “pulled out” for the massage.
the massage went on for a long time and she said it felt different from other
glute massages she’d received in the past.
when
she turned over onto her back, she said she her chest was covered with a
washcloth.  she acknowledged her memory on how this happened was “a little
vague” but believed he must have seen her exposed when the cloth was put in
place.
the
massage of her chest, as noted above, was primarily to her sternum area.  she
said the defendant used both hands and had them under the cloth.  he did not
touch her breasts.  she said there was no discussion about what he was doing,
the reason for it, or whether she was agreeable to it.
the
massage of her stomach area also made her uncomfortable.  again, there was no
discussion about the reason for the massage.  she said he moved low on her
abdomen, and that it felt like the area of her pubic hair was moving a bit as a
result.
finally,
near the end of the massage, he stretched each leg out to the side. she was
concerned that her vaginal area was exposed as a result.
in
general, she said she felt like areas of her body were touched that didn’t need
to be touched.  she felt exposed.  she also questioned why a massage paid for
with a one-hour gift certificate stretched into three hours.
in
cross-examination, s.d. agreed she didn’t remember exactly what was discussed
prior to the massage.  it was put to her that the defendant proposed a
full-body, deep tissue massage.  she agreed that was possible.  she did not
recall discussing any specific body parts.  she denied that he explained the
reason for massaging certain areas, like the abdomen.  she said she’d never had
that area worked on before and wouldn’t know why it would be done.
she
agreed she told police the massage was “somewhat normal” until she flipped onto
her back.  while the glute massage was different from others she’d had in that
it was skin to skin rather than through the sheet, she testified that she was
not “totally alarmed yet”.  she denied giving consent to a glute massage
beforehand.  she agreed she never asked questions during the massage, but
denied that was because she’d already consented to what was happening.
regarding
the massage of her sternum area, it was put to her that the defendant offered
an intercostal massage.  she did not recall that.  it was put to her that he
suggested he could do the entire area, which would involve exposing her
breasts, or he could just do a few of the intercostal spaces in the middle of
her chest.  she was clear that conversation did not happen.  it was suggested
she opted for the more limited intercostal massage only in the middle of her
chest.  she denied that suggestion.
she
further denied that the towel filed as an exhibit was the same size as the one
he used on her chest.  it was suggested that he’d actually put two of the
exhibit towels on her chest and she disagreed.
s.d.
was also asked about receiving a phone call during the massage.  she said it
was possible but didn’t recall.  she denied the defendant offering to end the
massage after the call, and denied telling him not to worry about her boyfriend
as he was a control freak.
the
remainder of the cross-examination concerned her contact with k.m.  she agreed
they met as a result of their shared interest in running and were friends on
facebook.  she agreed they had told each other about their experiences with the
defendant.  she denied her account was influenced by their discussions.
count
10, as i have noted, was amended on consent to change the start of the date
range to 1 january 2013.
the
defendant testified that the one massage he gave to s.d. took place on 7
january 2013.  he testified that on meeting s.d. at the clinic, he had her fill
out a health history form.  he said they discussed her needs and she requested
a full-body massage.  he told her that would take two hours, rather than the
one hour her gift certificate entitled her to.  she was fine with a longer
massage.  he was asked if he charged her for the second hour, and he said he
did not recall.  he may have done it for free in appreciation of s.d.’s mother,
who had bought the gift certificate.
he said
they had a detailed discussion of the areas he would treat.  he assessed her
and found her to be well-balanced.  he said she listed off the areas she wanted
treated.  this included her feet, legs, hamstrings, glutes, back, neck,
shoulders, arms, and other areas as well.
they
also discussed intercostal massage.  he said he worked on the back and sides of
her rib cage, but that she didn’t want the front of her chest treated as she
was sensitive about that area.  he offered reflexology for her sternum area
instead, and she agreed.
he
began the massage on her back, and then moved to her glutes.  he testified that
she consented to the glute massage and to being undraped for that purpose.
as he
was massaging the second glute, just short of the one-hour mark of the massage,
he said she got a phone call.  he handed her the phone.  she spoke briefly and
hung up, throwing the phone on a chair.  she told him it was her boyfriend.  he
offered to stop the massage, but she said no.  he testified that she said, “don’t
worry about him, he’s a control freak.  you’re doing a great job; you can keep
going.”
after
she turned onto her back, he massaged her legs.  he recalled using a
combination of swedish and myofascial release techniques.  he said she gave her
consent for a massage to her legs, hip flexors, and abdomen.
following
the leg massages, he moved on to the sternum.  he said he overlapped two towels
on her chest and only exposed ½ - ¾” of her sternum.  at no time did he expose
her breasts or touch them.
he
denied any stretching of her leg out to the side as s.d. described.
overall,
he estimated the massage to be between two and two-and-a-quarter hours.  he
denied contacting her afterward in an attempt to get her to come back.
cross-examination
began with questions about s.d.’s payment for the additional time.  the
defendant’s testimony on that point was hard to follow.  he first said he told
her the gift certificate covered the first hour “and if she wanted longer, she
was going to have to pay for the rest.”  he then said he could not remember
exactly how much she paid, despite agreeing that his fee schedule dictated a
two-hour massage cost double the price of a one-hour massage.  he then agreed
he could not recall if he charged her for the second hour.  when it was
suggested to him that he didn’t charge her anything, he responded, “suggest
whatever you want.”
he
confirmed he had verbal consent for each portion of the massage.  he said she
“opted out” of the full chest wall massage and chose the sternum treatment
instead.  he repeated how he had the towels arranged on her chest.
it was
suggested that the sternum treatment was not part of the full-body, deep tissue
massage s.d. wanted.  his response was simply, “it’s part of the body.”  that
response is really not helpful and borders on flippant.
in my
view, the evidence related to count 10 is different from the other counts.
unlike the other allegations, the disputed conduct here is a massage of s.d.’s glutes
and the touching of her sternum.  there is no allegation of breast massage or
vaginal touching.
returning
to the elements of sexual assault as set out
in the
g.f
.
decision,
supra
,
justice karakatsanis said there were three:
the actus reus of
sexual assault requires the crown to establish three things: (i) touching; (ii)
of an objectively sexual nature; (iii) to which the complainant did not consent…
each
element must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
first element is satisfied.  it is common ground that there was touching by the
defendant.  that is the whole point of massage therapy.
it is
the second and third elements that present difficulties for the crown.  i will
deal with the second element first.
is the
massaging of s.d.’s glutes or buttocks “of an objectively sexual nature”?  that
is, would a reasonable person view that touching as sexual?  it’s important to
define who the reasonable person is and perhaps more importantly what their
knowledge of the surrounding context is.  the reasonable person in this
situation would be someone familiar with the reason the defendant and s.d. are
together (i.e. massage therapist and client), familiar with the general nature
of massage therapy, and familiar with the physical demands of athletic
training.  would a person, armed with that knowledge, find a glute massage to
be sexual in nature when done by a registered massage therapist in a clinic
environment?
i find
the answer is no.
even
taking s.d.’s evidence at its highest, i find the crown has not proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that the glute massage was a touching that was objectively
sexual in nature.  when asked about the actual contact, s.d. said, “yeah, just
like a regular – just like pushing.”  she did not testify to any unusual
movements by the defendant.  is it possible the defendant took an accepted
therapeutic massage too far?  it is possible, but possible is far short of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
i reach
the same conclusion with regard to the sternum treatment.  this was not a case
where the defendant is alleged to have massaged s.d.’s breasts.  on her
evidence, he rubbed the middle of her chest, between her breasts.  she was
asked if he ever touched her breasts and she said no.  i find the crown has not
shown the sternum touching to be objectively sexual in nature beyond a
reasonable doubt.
as to
the third element, the lack of consent by the complainant, i find i am unable
to accept the evidence of s.d. beyond a reasonable doubt.  i will explain why
that is.
in her
evidence, she did not recall discussing specific body parts to be massaged but
agreed it was possible.  she also did not recall signing any forms, though she
said he did do a physical assessment of her while she was standing.  when asked
if there was any conversation about consent, her response was “not that i know
of”.  further, she was unclear on the year when the massage took place.
i have
also considered the message she sent to lindsay cole where she said, “i’m just
trying to remember some of the details” of an inappropriate massage she’d had.
it was suggested to her that in saying that, she was tacitly admitting she
didn’t remember the details.  she disagreed, and said she was really just
trying to bring the defendant to ms. cole’s attention.  she said she remembered
the details despite what she wrote.  that contention is supported by the fact
that she gave her police statement shortly after sending that message.  while i
do have some concerns about s.d.’s memory, those concerns do not arise from
this message.
s.d.’s contact
with k.m, however, is troubling.
i have
no issue with the two of them knowing each other prior to trial, or even with
them discussing their allegations.  as s.d. said, her incident was years prior
to k.m’s.  there are, however, two significant problems with their contact.
the
first is that after she gave her statement to police, s.d. was told not to
speak to k.m (or any other complainant) about her allegations.  despite this
direction, they continued to discuss their experiences.  there’s a good reason
police tell complainants not to speak to each other in the course of an
investigation: they don’t want accounts to be tainted by other witnesses.  that
was clearly the intention of police in this case.  unfortunately, their
direction was not followed.
the
second involves s.d.’s contact with k.m after testifying.  an agreed statement
of facts submitted by counsel reads in part:
on february 15,
2024, s.d., after completion of her testimony, communicated with k.m via a
facebook message, indicating that she was asked questions in court about her
contact with karly about these allegations.  k.m advised the victim witness
assistance program about this, who disclosed the information to the crown
attorney’s office.
at the
start of trial, i issued a witness exclusion order.  witnesses were enjoined
from discussing their evidence with any other party.  that order was still in
effect on 15 february 2024.  at that time, k.m was still a potential crown
witness.  had she been called to testify, questions about her interactions with
s.d. would surely have been asked by both parties.  in speaking to k.m, s.d.
violated the witness exclusion order and put any evidence that might have been
given by k.m at risk of seeming tainted.
i do
not have sufficient evidence to find that s.d. wilfully violated the court’s
order.  while i cannot, and do not, ascribe any nefarious intention to her
actions, her failure to follow both the police direction and the witness order
are factors i can consider in determining her credibility and reliability.
s.d.’s
evidence on the issue of consent was already equivocal.  when i add to that
equivocality my concerns about her contacting another potential witness, i find
i am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the touching, neither to the
glutes nor to the sternum, was done without her consent.  the defendant will be
found not guilty of count 10.
i do,
however, accept her evidence regarding the use of the washcloth to cover her
chest.  she was clear and unshaken on that point, and the use of a small cloth
to cover a complainant’s body was testified to by multiple other witnesses.  while
i have not accepted her evidence as proof of the alleged offence beyond a
reasonable doubt, i do accept her testimony on that issue.  given the acquittal
on count 10, i view s.d., like j.p. regarding the breast touching, as
tantamount to an extrinsic witness.  her evidence does not prove a charged
count, but, following the reasoning set out in the next section, i accept her
evidence as to the washcloth on a balance of probabilities.  it can be used by
me when assessing claims of other witnesses that the defendant covered them
with small washcloths rather than large towels or sheets.
extrinsic
witnesses
the
final two witnesses are not named complainants on the information.  they are
extrinsic witnesses called only to provide similar fact evidence.  in my ruling
on that application, i found the evidence of both e.s. and c.m. to be
reasonably capable of belief and therefore admissible.  at this stage of the
proceeding, i must conduct a more demanding assessment.  i do not, however,
need to determine if i accept the entirety of their allegations beyond a
reasonable doubt.  i have ruled that their evidence, in the categories set out
in the similar fact ruling, is admissible.  it is the evidence related to those
similarities i must now consider to determine what weight, if any, i assign to
them.
the
test to be applied is set out with clarity in the case of
r.
v.
thurston
o.j. no. 4600 (s.c.j.)
by justice lalibert
é.  referring to evidence admitted
as similar fact, his honour stated:
213  as the judge of the facts
in this trial, i must instruct myself as to the proper use of such evidence.
214
the supreme court of canada
in r. v. arp
1998 canlii 769 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r. 339
, provides guidance on the correct
use of such evidence on the ultimate question of guilt or innocence.
215  the court states the
following at paragraph 72:
"similar fact evidence, on the
other hand, as circumstantial evidence, must be characterized differently,
since, by its nature, it does not carry the potential to be conclusive of
guilt. it is just one item of evidence to be considered as part of the crown's
overall case. its probative value lies in its ability to support, through the
improbability of coincidence, other inculpatory evidence. as with all
circumstantial evidence, the jury will decide what weight to
attribute to it."
216  the court must keep in mind
that this extrinsic evidence is relevant for the limited purpose for
which it is admitted.
217  it must not be used to
infer that the accused is a person whose character or disposition is such that
he is likely to have committed the offence. nor should he be convicted because
he is a bad person.
218  in assessing
the weight of this evidence, i must do so on a balance of
probabilities. this notion is found at paragraph 70 of arp where the
court states:
"...a preliminary finding of fact
governing the use of evidence is normally subject to the civil standard of proof...preliminary
questions of facts may be decided on a balance of probabilities..."
219  finally, at paragraph 66,
the supreme court explains that:
"...though the similar
fact evidence, standing alone, may fall short of proof beyond a reasonable
doubt, it can be relied upon to assist in proving another allegation beyond a
reasonable doubt. two separate allegations can support each other to the point
of constituting proof beyond a reasonable doubt, even where a reasonable doubt
may have existed in relation to each in isolation."
220  in the end, the evidentiary
value of other discreditable conduct lies in its "objective improbability
of coincidence."
i must examine the
evidence of the extrinsic witnesses to see if proves the specific conduct
alleged on a balance of probabilities.  if it does, it will be capable of
supporting the other allegations in that category.
e.s.
this is the
summary of ms. e.s.’s testimony from the similar fact ruling:
ms. e.s.
had been seeing a female massage therapist but was looking for a male therapist
who could give her a stronger massage.  she searched on google and found the
defendant.  she went to his house for all her visits, which commenced in or
around september 2019.  her areas of concern were her neck and back, as a
result of her working long shifts as a nurse and spending a lot of time at a
computer.
at the
first appointment, e.s. only brought credit cards as she thought she was going
to a clinic.  the defendant was looking to be paid in cash.  he told her she
could pay on the next occasion.  she believed she paid about $70 for a one-hour
massage, but when she told the defendant she only had $500 in coverage from her
employer, he told her she could pay whatever she wished, even as little as $20
per session.
she
believed she filled out a form describing the areas she wanted massaged.  he
left the room, telling her she could remove her clothing or leave it on if she
preferred.  she elected to remove all her clothing except for her underwear.
she laid facedown on the table, covered by a sheet.
she
testified that nothing untoward happened in her first massage.  they had an
unremarkable conversation and afterward, she booked her next appointment for a
week or two later.
the second
massage was longer than the first, lasting an hour and thirty minutes to an
hour and forty-five minutes.  he massaged her neck and back again, and included
a massage of her jaw as well.  notable on this occasion was that the defendant
answered the door in his pajamas, or possibly jogging pants.  she waited in the
therapy room while he got showered and dressed.  she testified that she felt
uneasy after the second massage but couldn’t explain why.  regardless, she
booked a third massage, again a week or two later.  at the second appointment,
she paid for both the first and second massages.
the third
massage was markedly different.  it was approximately three hours long.  it
began with him preparing a basin for her to soak her feet.  she wasn’t told why
this was being done.  while her feet were soaking, she said he engaged in
unexpected and inappropriate conversation.  she said he asked her if she waxed
her pubic hair.  she felt very uncomfortable but answered.  he then told her
how much it hurt when he had his own pubic hair waxed.  this conversation was
unrelated to anything happening at the time.
after the
foot soak, she moved to the massage table.  by that point, she was unclothed
but for her underwear and lying on her stomach.  she was covered by a sheet.
when the defendant entered the room (having left so she could undress), she
said he lifted the sheet and looked at her.  he remarked, “oh, you’re wearing
your underwear”.  he told her he could do a much better job if she wasn’t.
the massage
began on her feet and lower legs.  she testified to not knowing why he was
working on this part of her body.  he moved up the entire length of her legs,
including her inner thighs.  he did not massage her buttocks but again, at some
point during this part of the massage, told her he could do a better job if she
wasn’t wearing underwear.  he eventually moved to massaging her back.  when
asked, she could offer no reason she knew why her inner thighs were being
massaged.  later, when she moved onto her back, he massaged the inner thighs
again.  she did not recall any discussion of consent to him touching that area.
she was
clear that he did not touch her underwear during this massage, nor did he touch
her vaginal area at any point in her dealings with him.
when on her
back, the defendant also massaged her chest wall.  to do this, he put two
towels on her chest, one on each breast, under the sheet that had been covering
her.  he then pulled down the sheet, leaving the towels in place.  she was
shown exhibit 13, which is a towel counsel said measured 30” x 16”.  she agreed
the towels used were similar but said they were folded into four, in a
rectangle shape, when on her body.  her breasts were never exposed during this time.
he then
massaged the muscles between her ribs, next to her sternum.  this massage was,
she said, on her breast and about three inches from her nipple.  he only
massaged the right breast in this way.  there had been no discussion about why
this area was being massaged or if she consented to it, but she speculated that
as she’d complained of pain in her right scapula, perhaps this massage was
meant to address that issue.
while she
booked another massage at the conclusion of the third appointment, she had no
intention of ever returning.  the conversation about pubic hair had
sufficiently discomfited her that she did not want to go back.
in
cross-examination, e.s. agreed the defendant had shown her a diagram that
depicted how muscles are connected.  she agreed he may have suggested a
full-body massage, though she didn’t recall that happening.  likewise, she
conceded he may have mentioned massaging the chest wall as well, she just
didn’t recall.
it was
suggested to her that at the conclusion of the second massage, the defendant
offered a full-body massage on the next occasion.  again, she agreed that may
have happened.  she also acknowledged he may have talked about a foot and leg
massage as a way to help her with being on her feet so much.
regarding
the defendant lifting the sheet and seeing her underwear, she clarified that
while she felt that happen, she did not see it happen.
in the
similar fact ruling, i found e.s.’s evidence to be admissible in the following
categories: “underwear removal encouraged” and “unusual business practices”.
while i must consider the totality of her evidence, it is on those discrete
issues only where i must make a determination of acceptance or rejection.
much of
e.s.’s evidence was qualified on cross-examination.  areas she testified to in
chief, like there being no discussion about the defendant massaging her legs,
were questioned.  she agreed that the defendant may well have offered a
full-body massage for her third appointment.  they may also have discussed a
full-body massage during the foot soak at that last appointment.  likewise,
they may have discussed a massage of her chest wall.  on these areas, and
others, e.s. agreed they may have had conversation but she could not recall.
she agreed it was possible.  these admissions are important because the picture
painted in her evidence in chief was of an unexpected full-body massage where
the defendant touched areas she wasn’t expecting.  that may well not have been
the case.
later
in cross-examination, e.s. remembered they did in fact discuss a leg massage.
she was adamant that discussion did not include the defendant potentially
massaging her inner thighs.
on the
issue of the defendant lifting up the sheet and seeing e.s. was still wearing
her underwear, the witness was clearer.  she agreed that she did not see him
lift the sheet up but rather only felt it.  i have no issue with her testifying
to feeling the sheet that had been covering her move in this way.  immediately
after she felt the sheet move, she said he made a comment about her still
wearing her underwear.  this led her to believe he’d seen her underwear.  it
was put to her that she was making an assumption on that point, and she
agreed.  in my view, it’s a reasonable assumption.  it was then put to her that
the defendant made the comment based on what he could see through the sheet,
not under it.  while the witness agreed, i find that explanation to be
speculative.  i have no evidence that this sheet was anything other than a standard
bed sheet.  nothing to suggest it was especially thin or translucent.  the
defendant himself described it as a twin cotton sheet of average thread count.
i also have no evidence of the colour or style of the underwear e.s. was
wearing, and whether that might have made them more visible through the sheet.
in the circumstances, i have no reason to accept the notion that he could see
her underwear through the sheet.  i accept her testimony that she felt the
sheet move off her and he then made the comment.  the only reasonable inference
is that he saw her underwear when he moved the sheet.
e.s.
made no complaint about improper draping, though she did testify to both her
legs being uncovered at once during the leg massage.  again, however, it was
suggested to her that only one leg at a time was uncovered, and she agreed that
was possible.
in his
evidence, the defendant denied making any comment about being able to do a
better job if e.s. was not wearing underwear.  he also denied any massage of
her upper thigh or groin area.  he did agree he massaged her quadriceps “from
the inguinal fold on down”, though he denied going into the groin area or the
inner thigh.  by his evidence, he only massaged the front of her upper thigh
and the outer area closer to her hip.  it’s unclear, therefore, why it was put
to her in cross-examination that he did tell her he could massage her inner
thighs and that she agreed.  in any event, she denied that suggestion.
the
defendant was also asked about his massage of e.s.’s sternum area.  he
described how she was draped and the work he did.  he said he could not recall
whether he treated only one side of her chest or both.  while certainly this
massage was done several years earlier, and e.s. herself admitted to some
vagueness to her memory, the defendant’s testimony on this point is curious.
elsewhere in his evidence, his recall of events is comprehensive.  for example,
he could remember how many inches above a.r.’s pubic bone his hand rested
during her massage, and which finger he said j.s. used to point to areas she
wanted treated, but he could not recall whether he massaged one or both sides
of e.s.’s chest?  this is another example of the defendant’s intermittent
memory of events.
he
denied any discussion of pubic hair.  he said that conversation arose from
their discussion of pulling off band-aids, and the relative pain tolerances of
men and women.  he agreed he talked about waxing body hair, but said it was
only in relation to him telling her about a time when he had leg hair waxed.
in
cross-examination, the defendant disagreed on the length of the second  and
third massages.  he also disagreed that he was in jogging pants or pajamas when
e.s. arrived for the second appointment.
when
asked about how e.s. paid for her massages, he agreed she could have only paid
cash or cheque as he had no way to accept credit card payments.  he was unable
to say what he charged her for any appointment.  he was asked if it was
important for him to be paid for his work.  he said:
a. i've never worried about money in my
practice. i was actually the highest paid massage therapist in canada on
record, and i never, ever worried about money. the money just came.
he
offered no support for the assertion that he was “the highest paid massage
therapist in canada on record”.  it is surprising to hear, though, that a
person, no longer a registered massage therapist, working out of his home in
belle river, would be the highest paid practitioner in the country.
perhaps
he was referring to his time as a registered massage therapist at mifflin
chiropractic.  he was asked about his hours of work in his examination in
chief:
q.
all
right. tell us about your typical hours of work?
a.
for
massage therapy, it was a little different for
a
massage
therapist
versus
a
doctor,
a
chiropractor,
a medical
doctor
because
people
would
take
work
off
to
go
to
those
appointments,
but
it
seemed
like
the
majority who
were for
massage
therapy,
they
were
coming
after
work.
my
typical
day
would
be
at
any
time
from
eight
in
the
morning
and
because
we're
an
automotive
community,
people
who
would
be
working
on
afternoons
or
midnights,
might
be
a
morning
client,
and
people
later
afternoon
might
be
a
day
shift
client,
but
more
people
worked
days.
so,
my
schedule
would
go
all
the
way
up
until
10
o'clock
at
night
sometimes
because
after 4
p.m., that's when you get an influx of people who want massages and you want to
be available for them. so, it was a pretty broad schedule as far as the time of
day.
q.
so,
you worked days like during the day and into the evening?
a.
into
the evening, yeah.
q.
what
about weekends?
a.
weekends,
saturday is another big day because a lot of people are off work on saturdays,
and it's just an opportunity to fill a schedule for sporadic times during the week
where you might have open appointments. but saturdays are definitely a day
where you can see a few patients.
he
testified to his hourly rate being perhaps $70-80, and that it changed over the
years.
candidly,
i see nothing in his evidence that supports the notion that he could have been
the highest paid therapist in canada.  whether at the clinic or in his home, he
worked when he was booked, and charged fairly standard rates.  i view his
evidence on this point as little more than hyperbole.
he
denied suggestions that he told e.s. he could do a better job if she wasn’t
wearing her underwear.  it was put to him that he massaged her upper inner
thigh, and made that comment.  he responded by detailing an epsom salt
technique he used on her legs.  he testified he used a coffee grinder to grind
the salt and mixed it with oil  he would let it sit on the skin, then remove it
with a hot towel from his roasting pan.  he did this to let the magnesium
penetrate the skin and relax the tissues.
none of
that was responsive to the question he’d been asked.
it was
put to him in cross-examination that he only treated the right side of e.s.’s
chest.  unlike his evidence in chief, when he said he didn’t remember, he said no,
he’d done both sides.
again,
the question i must ask is whether i accept e.s.’s evidence on the issues of
underwear removal and the defendant’s business practices on a balance of
probabilities.  in answering that question, i must consider the totality of her
evidence and also assess the impact of any contradictory evidence.
e.s.
testified both in chief and in cross-examination that the defendant told her he
could do a better job massaging her if she was not wearing underwear.  she said
he told her this initially, after she felt the sheet move on her body, and
again as he was massaging her legs.  she maintained this evidence in
cross-examination.
throughout
her evidence, e.s. readily agreed with suggestions she could not remember
particular points with clarity.  when she did not remember something, she
admitted it.  as to the defendant saying he could do a better job massaging her
if she was not wearing underwear, e.s. was consistent and unshaken.  while the
defendant denied saying this, i prefer e.s.’s evidence on this point.  the test
as i have stated is a balance of probabilities.  on that standard, i accept e.s.’s
evidence and it can be used to bolster the credibility of j.s. and a.r. as to
what they say happened.
i reach
the same conclusion regarding e.s.’s evidence on the defendant’s billing
practices.  she testified that while his rate was $70 per hour, when she told
him she had only $500 in coverage he told her she could pay what she wished.
he suggested she could pay as little as $20 per session.  she also said the
second massage was between one hour and thirty minutes and one hour and
forty-five minutes, while the third massage was three hours long.
when
asked about his discussions with e.s. as to billing, the defendant said he did
not remember what he told her about rates.  he estimated he was charging about
$70 per hour at that time but could not recall exactly.  he also had no note or
memory of how much she paid, or if she even did pay, for any of her
appointments.  on this point, if anything, the defendant’s evidence supports
the notion that his billing practices were very fluid.
he
agreed the second massage may have gone over one hour.  he testified the third
massage was two hours, not three.  given how loose the defendant’s approach to
billing was for these appointments, i am unable to place very much confidence
in his time estimates.
i
accept e.s.’s evidence on this issue.  it supports the evidence of j.s. and s.d.
as to the defendant’s desire to keep them as clients regardless of their
ability to pay (as in j.s.’s case) and his willingness to go far beyond the
allotted appointment time (as in s.d.’s case).
c.m.
ms. c.m.’s
evidence is summarized as follows from the similar fact ruling:
ms. c.m.
was a client of the defendant’s from 24 june 2016 to 20 january 2017.  in
november 2015, she was involved in a motor vehicle accident that resulted in
injuries.  she had issues with her upper spine, specifically spinal stenosis,
herniated discs, osteoporosis, and osteopenia, along with a lower-back injury.
while these conditions were not defined, i find i can infer that c.m. had a
host of issues related to her back that led to her engaging the services of the
defendant.
at her
first visit, she said the defendant told her he would massage her inner thighs
as part of the treatment for her lower back.  he told her it would be her inner
leg from her kneecap to her groin.  she did not recall signing any consent
forms.  the massage of her inner thighs became part of the “normal routine”.
for her
appointments, she would typically wear old thong underwear.  she remembered
this as she wore old underwear because she expected to get massage oil on it.
regarding draping, she said she was always covered with a sheet.  she said she
was shy about her chest and so would hold the sheet in place by tucking it into
her armpits.  the defendant would tell her when he needed to uncover a
particular body part.
c.m.
testified about one specific visit, on 15 july 2016.  on that occasion, she was
lying on her back.  her legs were in what she called a frog position: her knees
were fully bent, heels close to her buttocks, soles of her feet touching, and
knees spread wide.  what she calls the frog position appears to be what j.p.
called the butterfly position.  she was in that position at the direction of
the defendant.  she had a sheet over her, tucked into her armpits.  with a
sudden movement she likened to making a bed, the defendant took the sheet and
flung it off her.  she kept it in place with her arms, but she said her lower
body was exposed.  he then took the elastic portion of her underwear and moved
it to the side, completely exposing her vaginal area.  he then started
massaging her inner thigh.  she said she was fully exposed for several minutes.
at the end
of the massage, she said he acted like nothing had happened.  she felt violated
and upset.
c.m. said
that she stayed with the defendant as he had told her that if she switched
massage therapists, her insurance company may cancel her benefits.  the
benefits she had were not through her employment but were the result of the
motor vehicle accident.  she had no other coverage for massage treatments.
she
returned to the clinic 2-3 days later.  she had resolved to confront him about
what had happened.  in the treatment room, she told him in a stern voice that
she was never to be uncovered like that again, and that she felt humiliated and
violated.  in response, the defendant became angry and told her to lower her
voice.  he said he didn’t want people to hear her as he already had one
complaint against him.
he told her
that he wasn’t going to be able to treat that part of her body if that is how
she felt.  she tried to tell him it wasn’t the treatment that was the problem,
it was him uncovering her.  ultimately, he left the room and told her to get
ready for the massage.  she was still upset.  she asked for a tissue and he
responded by telling her she needed to toughen up.  she said he downplayed the
seriousness of her complaint.
as time
passed, her conditions were getting worse.  her family doctor told her to
reduce her massages from twice a week to once a week.  when she did, the
defendant got angry again.  he called her doctor a jack-of-all-trades and said
she needed to stick up for herself.
her
condition did not improve and so in 2017 she chose to stop seeing the
defendant.  not wanting to create more conflict, she told him her treatment
plan had run out and that her doctor was stopping the massage therapy.  when
she went to the clinic to pay for her final treatment, he told her she owed him
for a previous appointment at another clinic as well.  he again became irate.
she said he threw the receipt at her.  she left quickly as “he was very, very
angry”.
later, she
told another massage therapist what happened.  subsequent to that, the college
of massage therapists of ontario contacted her, as did the police.  she
confirmed she never spoke with any other complainant in the case.
in
cross-examination c.m. noted that the pressure he used in massaging her
increased significantly after she complained to him.  the increased pressure
was painful and made her cry.
she was
also asked about text messages she’d sent to the defendant.  on the day he
exposed her vaginal area, she sent a text afterward telling him she felt good
after the treatment.  she also sent the treatment plan she had with the
defendant to the insurance company, identifying him as her therapist.  there
were further communications between them, but she justified them as an effort
to maintain her relationship with him as she didn’t want to lose her accident
benefits.
c.m.
referred two other women to the defendant.  one was a very elderly woman and
the other was a friend.  she said she’d told the friend what the defendant had
done when he uncovered her, but the friend wanted his number regardless as she
wanted a deep-tissue massage.  at first, c.m. said no, but eventually did give
her his information.
c.m.’s
evidence is relevant only to the issues of improper draping and the defendant’s
reaction to being discharged.
in her
evidence, c.m. confirmed the defendant explained the need to massage her inner
thighs, though it seemed she didn’t fully understand the reason.  she agreed in
cross-examination that he performed an assessment of her at the first
appointment and mentioned an issue with her pelvis.  she said he gave her
exercises to do to help stretch out her inner thighs.
her
massages were typically about 90 minutes long, and the defendant stuck to that
timeframe, more or less.  certainly, there was no evidence of two or three hour
massages from c.m..
she
testified to the defendant using a heavy, grinding pressure when massaging her,
to the point of making her cry.  he told her he needed to break up fascia or
tissue so she could heal properly, so she let him do it.  she also said that
pressure got “absolutely worse” after she confronted him about moving the sheet
and her underwear.
while
she testified that he may have accidentally touched her vaginal area when
moving her underwear, she did not recall feeling his hand touch her.  she
confirmed she told the college of massage therapists investigators that he did
not touch her genitals.
it was
suggested to c.m. that when she was in the frog position (the position
described by other witnesses as the butterfly position), there was no actual
massage going on.  rather, he was simply stretching her legs.  while i remind
myself that counsel’s suggestions are not evidence, that suggestion was
contradicted by the defendant’s own evidence when he was asked about stretching
s.d.’s legs:
q. okay. you didn't stretch her leg out to
the side?
a. there was no stretches.
q. okay. and you remember that distinctly?
a. i've never done stretches with any
client in my whole career. i've given stretches to people to do at home on
their own time, but i've never stretched clients. that's not part of my
practice.
c.m.
was asked about the text messages she’d sent to the defendant over the course
of their professional relationship.  specifically, she was asked about messages
she’d sent following the massage where she said he’d exposed her vagina.  she
texted the defendant that she was feeling really good after their session, and
that she’d faxed the treatment plan identifying the defendant as her massage
therapist to her insurance company.  she also thanked him.  when asked to
comment on these texts, she said she didn’t remember sending the one where she
said she felt good after their session.  further, she said that while she may
have sent the texts, it didn’t change what she said he did.
in my
view, this was proper cross-examination that pointed out an apparent
inconsistency between her testimony of being very upset after the massage and
her texts, where she was seemingly happy and grateful.
c.m.
also explained her subsequent texts as being what she felt was necessary to
secure her medical treatment given what the defendant had told her about
potentially losing her benefits if she changed therapists.  as she put it:
a.
can i explain something for a second? if i was feeling vulnerable that somebody
would take away my healthcare and i wouldn’t be able to go to work, i would
sure be doing a little bit of butt kissing. and that’s all i’m going to put
there. okay? because i do not like conflict and i wanted to smooth things over,
and i wanted my massage therapist to fix me.
q.
okay. so, that’s what this is? in your words, butt kissing?
a.
somewhat, because i was threatened.
q.
okay.
a.
i was feeling threatened because i’d been told
over
and over again that if you go from one massage therapist to
another,
you’ve already gone here, you’ve gone to this one,
you’ve
gone to that one. that was always explained to me when i was there.
in
cross-examination, when asked if she “continued to choose” the defendant as her
massage therapist, c.m. said the following:
a.
i’m going to say the same thing that i said all along. i needed treatment. i
needed to make sure my benefits continued, and i continued to go where i felt i
had to instead of opening and calling the insurance company and telling them that
something happened to me. oh, now you have to go report here. now we have to
find you another massage therapist. now you need to do this. i already had went
through issues. see what happened when i even went to another massage
therapist? right away they called somewhere, reported, and then i had people
calling me, asking to look at all my records, my notes. i didn’t call. i just
wanted to get better. i just wanted to heal.
she did
not dispute the suggestion that she may not have told police about the
defendant claiming her benefits were at risk if she switched therapists.  she
said she’d just had surgery and may not have remembered everything.  in
re-examination, however, she refreshed her memory using her statement and confirmed
that she did, in fact, tell police the defendant had warned her that she would
lose her benefits if she went somewhere else.
the
defendant denied all of c.m.’s claims regarding the 16 july massage.  he did
not try to pull the sheet off her, nor did he expose her vaginal area.  prior
to that date, he said she’d expressed discomfort with him massaging her hip
area close to her genitals.  he said they discussed the issue and he told her
he didn’t have to treat that area.  instead, he gave her a series of stretches
to do.  this discussion took place on 5 july, and he never treated that area of
her body again.
he did
massage her inner thigh on the 16
th
, but not her upper inner thigh.
he maintained she was properly draped throughout.
he
denied any argument following the 16 july massage.  the only time she ever
voiced any issue with draping was at the start of the 5 july treatment as noted
above.  he said her account of her confrontation, with him telling her to keep
her voice down, never happened.  he also never advised her about her benefits
being jeopardized if she tried to change therapists.
on that
point, crown counsel asked the defendant if, based on his knowledge, those
accident benefits might well be at risk if c.m. switched therapists.  this is
from his cross-examination:
q. okay. do you know if that's the case?
meaning this, do you know if you switch massage therapists too much, your
insurance company might cancel your benefits? do you know whether or not that's
even true?
a. i don't believe that's possible. when
there's a motor vehicle accident claim, for example, i wasn't privy to all of
her history from the motor vehicle accident and every single doctor and
therapist that she went to, but i know that each individual has to fill out a
request for treatment and stipulate the areas of body being treated, length of
treatment plan, what the length of the treatment sessions are, how many per
sessions per treatment plan, and they give recommendations based on their
assessment and how they review the claim, and everyone can be individual and
different.
for example, there's also something on a
motor vehicle accident claim that's called “mmr”, maximum medical recovery, and
every practitioner and professional that fills out one of those forms and is
responsible for a treatment plan, is required to determine whether or not
they've reached maximum medical recovery and the treatment plan at that point,
which requires multiple conversations with the insurance adjuster who's in
constant touch with us, and my plan for somebody else is based on my skill, my
ability, what i assess, where i am in the treatment, and if i can offer any
more benefit.
so, for her to leave one massage therapist
who did an assessment a certain way, whatever reason she decided to leave that
person for, it doesn't really have anything to do with my treatment plan, what
i suggest, what my assessments are, and when i determine whether or not i'm
offering any more benefit and i've reached maximum medical recovery.
as that
answer was non-responsive, counsel repeated her question:
q. okay - do you know, thank you for
clarifying -do you know whether or not the insurance company might take issue
or cancel benefits or coverage if a client or patient switches massage
therapists or service providers?
a. i know, performing my job as a massage
therapist over several motor vehicle accident claims over the years, that i
have no authority to have someone's insurance canceled. i report based on what
my findings are, and i have no information that would lead me to believe that
anyone had that power or authority.
it was
only on the third time of asking that the defendant answered the question:
q. have you ever heard of an insurance
company canceling someone's coverage because they switched around too much?
a. never.
the
defendant was asked in cross-examination about c.m. getting into what she
termed the frog position, and whose idea it was.  this exchange occurred:
q. and she was in that position because
you told her to get in that position?
a. yes, i did.
it was
the defendant who directed c.m. into that position.
but,
seconds later:
q. but you told c.m. to do it?
a. i don't remember 100 percent for sure
if i instructed c.m. to get into that position.
in my
view, there is no other reason c.m. would have been in that position other than
she was directed into it by the defendant.  i find as a fact he did so.
lastly,
both parties were questioned about seeing each other at church in late 2022 and
early 2023.  the defendant said c.m. sat next to him during one service around
christmas time.  he called the encounter “upsetting” and had physical
difficulty testifying on this point.  he said after the service where she sat
next to him, she looked at him and said “merry christmas” in a loud voice.  he
told her he didn’t think she sat next to him by accident, and she said, “yeah,
i know.”
he said
she then started attending the 9am service.  he began seeing her regularly
through february and into april.  one day, near the end of april, he saw her
sitting in front of him.  he tapped her on the shoulder and said “hi”.
he said
that after that encounter, he changed where he normally sat because “i didn’t
want to encounter or see her anymore”.
c.m. testified
that on one occasion, she saw someone who she thought was the defendant while
at church.  she said he tapped her on the shoulder after the service.  she said
she froze, then said, “i have to go, i’m going to get prayers”.  she then “made
a very clear beeline to get away”.
i do
not need to resolve this conflict in the parties’ evidence for the purpose of
this trial.  the encounter took place some six years after c.m.’s last massage
and is not connected to any alleged misconduct.  i note only the incongruity in
the defendant saying how upsetting and unnerving seeing c.m. was, with him
actively tapping her on the shoulder and saying hello.  in any event, i do not
put significant weight on this part of their evidence, collateral as it is to
the charges.
c.m.’s
evidence is relevant only to the similar fact issues i have identified.  that
is, improper draping and the level of the defendant’s reactions in their
therapist/client relationship.
c.m.
was a compelling witness.  it was clear to me she did not wish to report any of
her dealings with the defendant to police or to anyone.  it was the college and
the police who came to her.  she testified to the defendant trying to remove
the sheet from her body and to him moving her underwear in a way that exposed
her vagina.  i find her to have been a credible witness.  she was questioned
about her texts following the 16 july massage and provided an explanation.  had
i been asked to accept c.m.’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt, i may well
have come to a different conclusion.  the test, however, is whether i find her
account to be more likely than not.  regarding the attempted removal of the
sheet, i do find her evidence to be believable on a balance of probabilities.
i have
considered if i can make the same finding regarding her evidence about her
underwear.  after much consideration, i cannot.  i accept c.m.’s evidence that
she felt something brush over her vagina before the defendant started massaging
her inner thigh.  she was candid in saying she did not look at what was
happening.  can i say it is more likely than not that what she felt was the
defendant moving her underwear?  no.  it’s equally likely that she felt the
sheet moving across her genitals, and felt the defendant tucking the sheet into
her underwear.  i am not saying i do not believe c.m.; i am saying i cannot
find her assumption about what happened to be sufficient proof on a balance of
probabilities.
in the
result, c.m.’s evidence regarding removal of the sheet will be admissible to
bolster the credibility of the other witnesses who have claimed improper
draping.  her evidence about her underwear will not.
i have
considered her evidence in its totality, together with the contradictory
evidence provided by the defendant, on the issue of his anger when she
questioned his methods and ultimately ended their relationship.  i find c.m. to
have been a credible witness on this issue as well.  i accept her evidence that
she confronted him about the 16 july massage and that he reacted angrily.  i
further accept her evidence as to how his demeanour with her changed after that
point, and about his anger at being questioned by her doctor.  i find her
evidence as to the issue of the defendant being unusually persistent in trying
to keep control of her as a client can form part of my credibility assessment
for other witnesses.  specifically, this refers to j.s. and a.r..
the expert’s
report
the
parties filed an expert report in this case as part of an agreed statement of fact.
the report was prepared by simone valere.  ms. valere has been a registered
massage therapist since 1997.  she also holds a diploma in osteopathic manual
practice and a bachelor of science degree from the university of guelph.  she
has taken several additional courses and been retained as an expert witness by
the college of massage therapists of ontario on five occasions.  on two of
those occasions, in addition to authoring a report, she provided testimony.
she also provided expert testimony in a sexual assault trial in 2021.
her
report acknowledges her duty to be impartial in her review of this case.
the
qualification and acceptance of an expert witness relies on the four criteria
set out by
the supreme court of canada in
r.
v.
mohan
1994 canlii 80 (scc)
,
2
s.c.r. 9
.  those criteria continue to be used by courts today.  they are:
(1)
relevance
(2)
necessity
in assisting the trier of fact
(3)
the
absence of any exclusionary rule
(4)
a
properly qualified expert
ms.
valere is offered as an expert in the field of massage therapy.  her evidence
is clearly relevant to the case before me.  as well, this area is not one that
is commonly known to the general population.  without assistance, i would be
less able to evaluate the actions of the defendant against the professional
standards that governed him or what might be expected in a massage practice.
finally, i see no exclusionary rule that would prevent the reception of expert
evidence in this case.
ms.
valere is a massage therapist of long standing.  she has assisted both the
college of massage therapists of ontario as well as the court by providing
expert evidence.  she states in her report that she understands the need to be
unbiased and to provide evidence only on areas of her expertise.  having
reviewed her qualifications, i accept ms. valere as an expert in all aspects of
the massage therapy profession.
it must
be remembered, however, that her report is based on the statements of various
witnesses.  ms. valere was not present for the trial and so did not opine on
the incidents as presented by the complainants in court.  i must keep this
limitation in mind when considering her evidence as it is the complainants’
evidence that will lead to a decision in this case.
the
report stated that all massage therapists are expected to know the legislation
and standards that apply to their work.  it is part of their initial education
and is also part of their yearly license renewal.
ms.
valere referred to the power differential that exists in the therapist/client
relationship.  this is from page 7 of the report:
therapeutic
relationships have an inherent power differential.  in this case, the massage
therapist would have an inherent power over the client in that the therapist is
considered an expert in their field.  for this reason, there is an intrinsic
level of trust, compounded when the therapist has been referred to the client
by someone they know and trust (as many of the complainants in this case were).
the
report then examined specific allegations against the defendant.
regarding
chest wall massage, the report confirmed this to be a valid therapeutic
undertaking.  at page 12 of the report, ms. valere set out “an inexhaustive
list” of indications where chest wall massage might be useful.  i note that
increased athletic performance is not one of the listed indications, but again
the list is not exhaustive.  the agreed statement of fact that accompanied the
report includes the statement that “reducing muscle tone to improve respiratory
ability” is another indication for a chest wall massage.  the effect of this
part of the report is to confirm that chest wall massages can be a legitimate
part of massage therapy.
massage
of the breast itself can also be an accepted practice, so long as the client
consents.  notably for this case, lymphatic drainage is listed among the
conditions where massage of the breast may be indicated.
it explained
proper draping techniques and emphasized the importance of communication
between the therapist and client to ensure client understanding and comfort.
exposing both breasts at the same time, and touching the nipple or areola (in
the context of a chest wall massage) would both be breaches of professional
standards.
an
important change came about in the profession on 11 september 2017.  as of that
date, written consent to treat sensitive areas was mandated.  the report stated
that written consent could be obtained for the gluteal area once at the
beginning of a treatment plan, but that written consent for other sensitive
areas such as the inner thighs, chest wall, and breasts, must be obtained at
each session.
relevant
to the present case, that change had not come into effect at the time of the
defendant’s interactions with the complainants.  the exception to that
statement is his treatment of j.s., which began before the change and continued
for years afterward.  in her evidence, however, she testified to having no
issue with the defendant’s massages until 2021, by which time he was no longer
a registered massage therapist.
there
was not, therefore, any obligation on the defendant to obtain written consent
to treat sensitive areas at the time he was seeing the other complainants.  j.s.
takes no issue with the massages she received from 2017 to 2020, where there
would have been such an obligation.
there
was, however, a duty on the defendant to inform his clients why he was treating
certain areas.  as the report noted, there were complainants who felt
ill-informed of the reasons he massaged certain areas.  i remind myself that it
is the evidence of the witnesses on which i must rely, not the statements used
by ms. valere.
the
report also addressed the issue of draping.  unless the client wishes
otherwise, only the area being treated should be uncovered.  ms. valere fairly
noted a situation where both breasts of a female client could be uncovered
simultaneously.  this is a “specialized lymphedema treatment” that still
requires the consent of the client.  the standard also requires a therapist to
position themselves in such a way when the client is turning over on the table
that they cannot see the client’s body.
ms.
valere also stated that putting clients in what has been described in this
trial as the butterfly position would not be standard practice.  the client
placing both legs in this position at the same time would not follow the
practice of only treating one side at a time, and would potentially leave the
client feeling vulnerable and uncomfortable.
the
report also contained several appendices.  these included materials from the
college of massage therapists of ontario related to professional standards on
which ms. valere relied in the creation of her report.
in ms.
valere’s opinion, based on the statements of the complainants, the defendant
violated the standards of his profession in multiple ways.  improper draping,
poor communication, and touching of complainants’ genitals were all noted by
her as examples of the defendant falling short of the stated requirements.
i have
considered this report in light of the testimony i have heard.  based on the
evidence, much of what ms. valere found was borne out.  evidence i have heard
and accepted described improper draping and undraping, the touching of
forbidden areas, and massages undertaken with little or no medical
explanation.  further, the actions and words of the defendant when questioned
or when complainants sought to cease their relationship with him, could certainly
be seen to have crossed the boundary of professionalism set out in the
materials.
i want
to be clear that the defendant is not on trial for being a bad massage
therapist.  he can fall short of the standards for massage therapy without
being found criminally liable for his actions.  i am not tasked with making
findings related to the materials set out in the expert report.  i am solely
concerned with whether the crown has met its burden in proving the charged
offences.
that
said, the content of the report is useful to me as evidence of the defendant’s
approach to his work.  the concerns set out by the complainants in their
evidence were all confirmed to be violations of his professional standards and
ethics.  in my view, this shows a reckless disregard towards his obligations as
a therapist.  rather than the knowledgeable, careful practitioner he portrayed
himself to be, the defendant has been shown to engage in repeated professional
misconduct.  this extended to his conduct during massages and to his pushing of
personal boundaries, as with the repeated attempts to connect with a.r. on
social media.  whether any of that misconduct rises to the level of criminal
offending is the question in this trial.
before
leaving the expert report, i remind myself that as of 2020, the defendant was
no longer acting as a registered massage therapist.  the standards and
expectations of the profession no longer applied to him.  this affects his
later dealings with j.s., at which point he was simply a masseur.  ms. valere confirmed
that anyone can use that title as it is not regulated.
the defendant’s
evidence
i have
already reviewed the defendant’s evidence in my assessment of each count.  as
my count-by-count review of his evidence should not and cannot be carried out
in vacuums, i will make further observations on his evidence as a whole.  these
observations should be taken as informing my count-specific determinations as
well.
i
remind myself that criminal trials are not credibility contests.  there is a
temptation, when trial evidence is one person’s word against another, to choose
the preferred account.  doing so is an error of law in the criminal context.  it
relieves the crown of its burden to prove offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
a defendant does not have to convince the trier of fact of anything; the burden
always remains entirely on the crown to prove guilt.
on key
points, i do not find the defendant to be a credible witness.  i accept that he
is or was an expert in the field of massage therapy.  he made his knowledge
clear throughout his testimony.  that he was an effective therapist is a point
made by several complainants.   that is not an issue.
if
anything, this knowledge and expertise undermine his claims of accident.  it is
simply not credible that a person so well-informed on the techniques and
practice of massage therapy would, over and over, accidentally engage in
conduct that left the complainants feeling they’d been touched vaginally.  i
reject his suggestion that in each case, perhaps it was the sheet they felt
moving, and mistakenly thought it was his hand.
i am
unable to accept his evidence as a believable description of his dealings with
the complainants.  i have set specific examples of why that is in the reasons
above.  i found the defendant to be a difficult and frequently non-responsive
witness.  when asked simple questions, he often gave lengthy technical
explanations that had little to do with what he was asked.  i further note that
credibility or reliability issues in the defendant’s evidence that arise with
respect to one complainant can and should be considered in my assessment of his
evidence related to other complainants and overall.
a court
should not place undue emphasis on demeanour evidence.  testifying is a
difficult task for anyone.  it brings out nervousness and causes stress even to
experienced witnesses.  i must, however, disagree with counsel’s suggestion
that the defendant was flustered in giving his evidence.  on the contrary, i
found the defendant to be very controlled and deliberate in his testimony.  he
had extensive technical knowledge and bristled at that knowledge being
questioned.
it is
striking to me that at times his recall of complainant appointments was astonishingly
complete.  when asked about s.d., he listed from memory seventeen different
areas of her body that they discussed treating.  but again with s.d., he
couldn’t remember if he ever charged her for the second hour of her massage.  the
result of this intermittent memory (together with the other concerns i’ve
detailed) is that i simply cannot accept his evidence.
i
recognize that i have viewed the defendant’s memory lapses as detrimental to
his credibility and reliability, while excusing to some degree the memory
lapses of some complainants.  lest i be thought to have applied uneven scrutiny
to the witnesses’ evidence, i will address that concern.
the
memory lapses of the complainants often related to peripheral events, like what
was discussed at initial meetings.  i have addressed situations where important
points were left out of a police statement but testified to at trial, such as a.r.’s
evidence about the touching of her breasts, or j.p.’s failure to use the word
“cupping” when telling police how the defendant touched her breasts.  i have
noted the impact of trauma on a person’s ability to recall events completely
and immediately.  i have stated in the foregoing reasons why i have accepted the
evidence i have, despite potential memory concerns.  as can be seen, there have
also been occasions where complainants’ memory issues have played a role in my
rejection of their evidence to the required standard.
the
memory issues of the defendant, however, are of a different sort.  where the
memory issues of complainants could be said to have weakened the substance of
their testimony, the defendant’s intermittent memory came and went in
self-serving and inexplicable ways.  when he testified about the specifics of
his physical motions at the time of the alleged misconduct, he remembered
precisely where his hands were, how long he treated various body parts, and even
how many times per second he would move his hands.  but when asked about his
objectively loose billing practices, he claimed he couldn’t remember how much
(or even if, in the case of s.d.) he charged his clients.  how the
self-professed “highest paid massage therapist in canada” would have almost no
memory about billing makes little sense.  as another example, he remembered the
exact words used by complainants at the moment of questionable conduct, like j.s.
saying that she knew he didn’t mean to come too close to her vagina, he wasn’t
doing anything wrong, and he was doing what he told her to do at the time of the
see-saw incident.  but he also could not remember something as basic as whether
he treated one or both sides of e.s.’s chest.  the context in which the
defendant’s memory lapses arose are markedly different, both in kind and in
import, than those of the complainants.  they do not warrant equal treatment.
i do
not find his blanket denials of wrongdoing, or possible innocent explanations,
believable, nor do they leave me with a reasonable doubt.
the result
this
has been a difficult case.  the trial has been very lengthy.  the evidence has
been voluminous.  the findings i have made are a result of considering all
evidence in this case bearing in mind the burden on the crown.  the crown has
proved most, though not all, counts beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
defendant will be found guilty of counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9.  he will
be found not guilty of counts 6 and 10.
released:  18 september 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt