ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. battiston
, 2025 oncj 197
date:
april 10, 2025
city
of toronto
court
file numbers:
4860 999
24 24100008-00 1 fa
4860 999
24 24100008-00 2 fa
4860 999
23 23101035-00 1 fa
4860 999
23 23101035-00 2 fa
4860 999
23 23100878-00 1 fa
4860 999
23 23100878-00 2 fa
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
luciano battiston
before
justice of the peace r. shawyer
heard
on april 4, 2025.
reasons
for judgment released on april 10, 2025
mcpherson, j ........................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
tomovski, r.................................................................................
counsel for the defendant
justice of the peace shawyer:
introduction
on april 4, 2025, the court heard the defendant, luciano battiston’s
(hereinafter the “defendant”), charter application (hereinafter “application”).
the relief that the defendant sought in his application was a stay of proceedings.
the defendant argued that because it took more than 18-month for his matter to
be resolved,
his 11b rights under the
charter of rights and freedoms
,
part 1 of the
constitution act
, 1982, being schedule b to the
canada act 1982
(uk),
1982, c 11 (hereinafter the “
charter
”) were violated.
the charges before the court stem from an accident that took place on october
30, 2023. on this date the defendant was making a left turn onto dufferin
street from ridelle avenue in the city of toronto (hereinafter the “city”).
while making this left turn the defendant struck two pedestrians (hereafter the
“accident”). as a result of the accident both pedestrians were injured and one
of the pedestrian’s eventually succumbed to their injuries while in hospital.
information before the
court
after the accident on october 30, 2023, the toronto police service
(“tps”) officers called to the scene and charged with investigating the
accident did not charge the defendant. as a result, the defendant was allowed
to leave the scene of the accident.
on november 2, 2023, an information (hereinafter the “original
information”) relating to the accident was sworn by a member of the tps. after
the information was sworn the defendant was contacted by a member of the tps.
he was asked to attend a tps station in relation to the accident. when the
defendant attended at the tps station as requested he was charged with two counts of careless driving causing bodily harm contrary to
s.
130(3)
of the
highway traffic
act
, r.s.o. 1990, c. h.8 (hereinafter “
hta
”). at the same time the defendant was also
issued a summons to appear in court for the first time on january 4, 2024.
on december 19, 2023, a replacement information was sworn. this
information replaced the original information (hereinafter the “second information”).
on january 5, 2024, a third information (hereinafter the “third
information) was sworn. the difference between the original information(s) and
the third was that the original information(s) charged the defendant with
careless driving causing bodily harm (x2). whereas the third information charged
the defendant with one count each of careless driving causing death and
careless driving causing bodily harm pursuant to
s. 130(3)
of the
hta
.
the third information was laid to reflect the fact that after the first two information’s
were laid one of the pedestrians that the defendant is alleged to have hit with
his vehicle on october 30, 2023, succumbed to their injuries.
on september 20, 2024, both the original two information’s and the third
information were before the court. after confirming which information’s were
before the court the prosecution advised that it would only be proceeding on
the third information and requested that the first two information’s be marked
withdrawn on consent.
the law and analysis
section 11(b)
of the
charter
provides that any person charged with an offence has
the right to be tried within a
reasonable time. in
r
v. jordan,
2016 scc 27
,
2016 csc 27
(hereinafter “
jordan
”) at paragraph 19 the supreme court of
canada (hereinafter “supreme court”) reiterated the importance of a defendant’s
right to be tried within a reasonable time:
[the] right to
be tried within a reasonable time is central to the administration of canada's
system of... justice. it finds expression in the familiar maxim: "justice
delayed is justice denied". an unreasonable delay denies justice to the
accused...and the public as a whole.
four years later the supreme court again opined on a defendant’s 11b
rights. in
r v. k.g.k.
,
2020 scc 7
,
2020 csc 7
(hereinafter “
k.g.k.
”) moldaver j writing on behalf of the majority said
at paragraph 25:
section 11(
b
) of the
charter
provides that “[a]ny person charged
with an offence has the right ... to be tried within a reasonable time”. this
provision reflects and reinforces the notion that “[t]imely justice is one of
the hallmarks of a free and democratic society” (
jordan
, at para.
1
).
section 11(
b
)
protects both an accused’s interests and society’s interests.
the individual dimension of
s.
11(
b
)
protects an
accused person’s interests in liberty, security of the person, and a fair
trial. the societal dimension of
s. 11(
b
)
recognizes, among other things, that timely trials are beneficial to victims
and witnesses, as well as accused persons, and they serve to instill public
confidence in the administration of justice (see
r. v. k.j.m.
,
2019 scc 55
(s.c.c.)
, at para.
38
).
in a provincial court of justice, the supreme court has decided that 18
months is a reasonable time.
in
jordan
the
supreme court said:
1      timely
justice is one of the hallmarks of a free and democratic society. in the
criminal law context, it takes on special significance.
section 11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights
and freedoms
attests to
this, in that it guarantees the right of accused persons “to be tried within a
reasonable time”.
2
moreover, the canadian public expects their
criminal justice system to bring accused persons to trial expeditiously. as the
months following a criminal charge become years, everyone suffers. accused
persons remain in a state of uncertainty, often in pre-trial detention. victims
and their families who, in many cases, have suffered tragic losses cannot move
forward with their lives. and the public, whose interest is served by promptly
bringing those charged with criminal offences to trial, is justifiably
frustrated by watching years pass before a trial occurs.
3      an
efficient criminal justice system is therefore of utmost importance. the
ability to provide fair trials within a reasonable time is an indicator of the
health and proper functioning of the system itself. the stakes are indisputably
high.
4      our
system, however, has come to tolerate excessive delays. the circumstances in
this appeal are illustrative. notwithstanding a delay of over four years in
bringing a drug case of modest complexity to trial, both the trial judge and
the court of appeal were of the view that the appellant was tried within a
reasonable time. their analyses are reflective of doctrinal and practical
difficulties plaguing the current analytical framework governing
s. 11
(
b
)
. these difficulties have fostered a
culture of complacency within the system towards delay.
5      a change
of direction is therefore required. below, we set out a new framework for
applying
s. 11
(
b
)
. at the centre of this new framework is
a presumptive ceiling on the time it should take to bring an accused person to
trial: 18 months for cases going to trial in the provincial court, and 30
months for cases going to trial in the superior court. of course, given the
contextual nature of reasonableness, the framework accounts for case-specific
factors both above and below the presumptive ceiling. this framework is
intended to focus the
s.
11
(
b
)
analysis on
the issues that matter and encourage all participants in the criminal justice
system to cooperate in achieving reasonably prompt justice, with a view to
fulfilling
s. 11
(
b
)
’s important objectives.
….
19      as we
have said, the right to be tried within a reasonable time is central to the
administration of canada’s system of criminal justice. it finds expression in
the familiar maxim: “justice delayed is justice denied.” an unreasonable delay
denies justice to the accused, victims and their families, and the public as a
whole.
20      trials
within a reasonable time are an essential part of our criminal justice system’s
commitment to treating presumptively innocent accused persons in a manner that
protects their interests in liberty, security of the person, and a fair trial.
liberty is engaged because a timely trial means an accused person will spend as
little time as possible held in pre-trial custody or living in the community
under release conditions. security of the person is impacted because a
long-delayed trial means prolonging the stress, anxiety, and stigma an accused
may suffer. fair trial interests are affected because the longer a trial is
delayed, the more likely it is that some accused will be prejudiced in mounting
a defence, owing to faded memories, unavailability of witnesses, or lost or
degraded evidence.
….
24      timely
trials allow victims and witnesses to make the best possible contribution to
the trial, and minimize the “worry and frustration [they experience] until they
have given their testimony” (
askov
,
at p. 1220
). repeated
delays interrupt their personal, employment or business activities, creating
inconvenience that may present a disincentive to their participation.
25      last
but certainly not least, timely trials are important to maintaining overall
public confidence in the administration of justice. as mclachlin j. (as she
then was) put it in
morin
, “delays are of consequence not only
to the accused, but may affect the public interest in the prompt and fair
administration of justice” (p. 810). crime is of serious concern to all members
of the community. unreasonable delay leaves the innocent in limbo and the
guilty unpunished, thereby offending the community’s sense of justice (see
askov
, at p. 1220
). failure “to deal fairly, quickly and efficiently with criminal
trials inevitably leads to the community’s frustration with the judicial system
and eventually to a feeling of contempt for court procedures” (p. 1221).
26
extended delays undermine public confidence in
the system. and public confidence is essential to the survival of the system
itself, as “a fair and balanced criminal justice system simply cannot exist
without the support of the community” (
askov
,
at p. 1221
).
27
canadians therefore rightly expect a system that
can deliver quality justice in a reasonably efficient and timely manner.
fairness and timeliness are sometimes thought to be in mutual tension, but this
is not so. as d. geoffrey cowper, q.c., wrote in a report commissioned by the
b.c. justice reform initiative:
... the widely perceived conflict
between justice and efficiency goals is not based in reason or sound analysis.
the real experience of the system is that both must be pursued in order for
each to be realised: they are, in practice, interdependent.
(
a criminal justice system for the
21st century
(2012), at p. 75)
28
in short, timely trials further the interests of
justice. they ensure that the system functions in a fair and efficient manner;
tolerating trials after long delays does not. swift, predictable justice, “the
most powerful deterrent of crime” is seriously undermined and in some cases
rendered illusory by delayed trials (mclachlin c.j., “the challenges we face”,
remarks to the empire club of canada, published in (2007), 40
u.b.c. l. rev.
819, at p. 825).
….
49
the most important feature of the new framework
is that it sets a ceiling beyond which delay is presumptively unreasonable. for
cases going to trial in the provincial court, the presumptive ceiling is 18
months from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial. for cases
going to trial in the superior court, the presumptive ceiling is 30 months from
the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial.
2
we note the 30-month ceiling would also apply to cases
going to trial in the provincial court after a preliminary inquiry.
3
as we will discuss, defence-waived or - caused delay
does not count in calculating whether the presumptive ceiling has been reached
— that is, such delay is to be discounted.
50      a
presumptive ceiling is required in order to give meaningful direction to the
state on its constitutional obligations and to those who play an important role
in ensuring that the trial concludes within a reasonable time: court
administration, the police, crown prosecutors, accused persons and their
counsel, and judges. it is also intended to provide some assurance to accused
persons, to victims and their families, to witnesses, and to the public that
s. 11(
b
)
is not a hollow promise.
….
57      there
is little reason to be satisfied with a presumptive ceiling on trial delay set
at 18 months for cases going to trial in the provincial court, and 30 months
for cases going to trial in the superior court. this is a long time to wait for
justice. but the ceiling reflects the realities we currently face. we may have
to revisit these numbers and the considerations that inform them in the future.
….
105      the
new framework for
s. 11(
b
)
can be summarized as follows:
• there is a ceiling beyond
which delay becomes presumptively unreasonable. the presumptive ceiling is 18
months for cases tried in the provincial court, and 30 months for cases in the
superior court (or cases tried in the provincial court after a preliminary
inquiry). defence delay does not count towards the presumptive ceiling.
•
once the presumptive ceiling is
exceeded
, the burden shifts to the crown to rebut the presumption of
unreasonableness on the basis of exceptional circumstances. exceptional
circumstances lie outside the crown’s control in that (1) they are reasonably
unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable, and (2) they cannot reasonably be
remedied. if the exceptional circumstance relates to a discrete event, the
delay reasonably attributable to that event is subtracted. if the exceptional
circumstance arises from the case’s complexity, the delay is reasonable.
the supreme court’s decision in
jordan
has been considered on
many occasions. one such occasion was in
r. v. coulter,
2016 onca 704
(hereinafter “
coulter
”). in
coulter
the ontario
court of appeal (hereinafter “onca”) at paras. 34-41 provided
a useful guide to lower courts for applying the
jordan
framework. under
the heading “[a] new framework summarized” the onca laid out the following
steps that a court must follow when applying the supreme court’s decision in
jordan
:
step
1:  calculate the total delay, which is the period from the charge to the
actual or anticipated end of trial.
step 2:  subtract
defence delay from the total delay, which results in the “net delay.”
step 3:  compare
the net delay to the presumptive ceiling.
step
4:
if the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, it is presumptively unreasonable.
to rebut the presumption, the crown must establish the presence of exceptional
circumstances. if it cannot rebut the presumption, a stay will follow. in general,
exceptional circumstances fall under two categories: discrete events and
particularly complex cases.
step
5:  subtract delay caused by discrete events from the net delay (leaving the “remaining
delay”) for the purpose of determining whether the presumptive ceiling has been
reached.
step
6:
if the remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the court must consider
whether the case was particularly complex such that the time the case has taken
is justified and the delay is reasonable.
step
7:  if the remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on
the defence to show that the delay is unreasonable.
step
8:  the new framework, including the presumptive ceiling, applies to cases
already in
the system when
jordan was released (the “transitional cases”).
after the
jordan
decision cases were litigated over how to apply
the
jordan
framework. this led to the supreme court’s decision in
k.g.k.
in
k.g.k.
at paragraph
31
moldaver j, under the heading “[t]he temporal
scope of the jordan ceilings”, clarified how
jordan
should be operationalized
by lower courts:
[p]roperly
construed, the
jordan
ceilings apply from the date of the charge until
the actual or anticipated end of the evidence and argument. that is when the
parties’ involvement in the merits of the trial is complete, and the case is
turned over to the trier of fact….this date permits the straightforward
application of the
jordan
framework in a manner consistent with its
design and goals.
the supreme court’s decision in
k.g.k.
means that the clock
starts running as of the date a charge is laid and it stops when the charges
are resolved. in accordance with
k.g.k.
anything that transpires from
the time a charge is laid until the time the charge is resolved may slow down
but never stop the 18-month clock.
the
jordan
framework is like a timer that has been started in an action
movie. once the clock has started it cannot be stopped unless either the correct
wires have been cut (i.e. a plea is entered, a court orders a withdrawal, or a
court orders a stay of proceedings) or the device explodes (a trial has
started, all of the evidence has been led, closing submissions have concluded
and the case is turned over to the trier of fact for a decision).
if a defendant chooses to try and resolve their charges before the court
by engaging in an early resolution process but ultimately decides to proceed to
trial,
time continues to tick away: see
halton
(regional municipality) v. grewal
,
2024 oncj 470
. if a defendant decides that
they want to plead guilty, enters a plea but then their plea is struck, time
continues to tick away. this is because as moldaver j wrote in k.g.k. “
the
jordan
ceilings apply from the date of the
charge until the actual or anticipated end of the evidence and argument”.
the
jordan
framework applies to
poa
proceedings
as well as criminal proceedings. in
r. v. nguyen
2020 onca 609
(hereinafter “
nguyen
”), the onca made it clear that the presumptive
ceiling of 18 months applies to provincial offences as well. specifically, the
onca said the 18-month ceiling applies to both charges contained in part i and
part iii of the
provincial offences act
,
r.s.o.
1990, c. p.33
(hereinafter the “
poa
”): see
nguyen
at para(s). 21, 22, and 26 and
r. v. battigaglia
,
o.j. no. 5267 at para. 19
(hereinafter “
battigaglia
”).
finally, as argued by defence counsel,
the
seriousness of the charges before the court do not factor into whether a
defendant’s 11b rights have been infringed. the supreme court in
r v.
williamson
,
2016 scc 28
at paras.
33 – 38
wrote:
34      first,
a person’s right to a trial within a reasonable time cannot be diminished based
solely on the nature of the charges he or she faces. as this court wrote
in
r.
v. harrison
,
2009 scc
34
,
2 s.c.r. 494
(s.c.c.)
, at para.
40
, “
charter
protections must be construed so as to
apply to everyone, even those alleged to have committed the most serious
criminal offences.” many appellate courts across the country, including this
one, have stayed serious charges, even when the total delay (minus defence
delay) was
less
than that in this appeal.
1
35
in this regard, we note that
s. 11
(
b
)
guarantees the right “to be tried
within a reasonable time”. it does not admit of gradients of reasonableness
where the charges are serious. for example, it does not guarantee the right to
be tried within “somewhat longer” than a reasonable time, or within a time that
is “excessive but not so long as to be clearly unreasonable” when the charges
are serious (cromwell j., at paras. 43 and 80). delay is either unreasonable,
or it is not. as a result, our point of departure with our colleague is on what
we consider reasonable. in short, we have different perspectives on a
subjective standard.
36      second,
while our colleague uses the seriousness of the offence to dilute the
constitutional right to a trial within a reasonable time, we consider that
the
charter
right is respected, and the public
interest is best served, by trying serious charges on their merits in a timely
fashion. these are
precisely
the cases that should be heard promptly, on
the strongest possible evidence.
37      third,
the seriousness of the offence does not sit comfortably with the notion of
reasonable
time
. some grave charges require very little time to be
tried, while some less serious charges require more time.
38      we
agree with our colleague that the charges against mr. williamson are grave.
like the court of appeal, we reach our conclusion “with great reluctance”
(para. 68). the victim underwent the ordeal of a criminal trial, and mr. williamson
was eventually convicted by a jury of his peers. but as we
discussed in
jordan
, timely justice is one of the hallmarks of a free and
democratic society. this case is an example of how delay works to the detriment
of everyone. conversely, timely justice accrues to the benefit of all.
the charges before the court stem from an accident on october 30, 2023. three
days later, november 2, 2023, an officer employed by the tps swore and filed an
information with the ontario court of justice in toronto (hereinafter “ocj”).
that information charged the defendant with two counts of
careless driving causing bodily harm”. the defence argues that the anticipated end of the defendant’s trial is 550 days (or 18.5
months) after the original information was sworn. therefore,
defence counsel argues that the defendant’s 11b rights have been violated
.
since the defendant was charged, no delay can be attributed to the
defence when applying the
jordan
framework: see
toronto (city of) v. battiston
,
2025 oncj 162
(“hereinafter “
battiston
”) at para 42. therefore, as the
defendant’s matter is scheduled to take 550 days (approximately 18.5 months) to
be completed, the time it will have taken is presumptively unreasonable as the
completion of evidence and submissions falls outside of the ceiling set in
jordan
:
see
coulter
at para
36
. as the copeland j.a. wrote on behalf of the
majority in
r v. vrbanic
,
2025 onca 151
at para
20
, once an application
justice has found the delay excessive (1 day or more over 18 months on a net
basis) they are obligated to find a breach of a defendant’s 11b rights and stay
the charges against them.
(a)
discrete event
on the first day of trial, march 21, 2025, court was not able to start
right at 9 a.m. because the prosecution had computer issues. rather court was
only able to start at 11:05 a.m. the delay in starting court together with the
length of time it took to hear from the prosecution’s only witness, from a practical
standpoint, the defence was not able to begin calling witnesses during the
first day of trial. this necessitated scheduling a third day of trial. the date
for the third day of trial, when evidence and closing submissions would
conclude, was set for a day more than 18-months since the information before
the court was laid.
the main thrust of the hearing was whether the delay occasioned by connectivity
issues that the prosecution had on the first day of trial was a discrete event
and therefore an exceptional circumstance. in his submissions counsel for the
defendant argued that “[t]he internet connectivity occurrence was not
reasonably unforeseen”, which means that it was not a discrete event and an
exceptional circumstance. whereas the prosecution argued that (1) the internet connectivity
issue was reasonably foreseeable because of the lack of internet connectivity in
poa courtrooms in toronto, (2) they took meaningful efforts to avoid internet
connectivity issues, (3) the internet connectivity issue that occurred on the
first of day of trial was a discrete event and (4) was an exceptional
circumstance.
it can be argued that the delay in starting court on the first day can
be classified as a discrete event. however, computer issues are a recurring
event in the poa courts in toronto that routinely delay matters before the
court as conceded by the prosecution in her submissions. in fact, on february
6, 2025, when this matter was before the court there were significant computers
issues that required the matter to be traversed to another courtroom before the
matter could be addressed.
with that being said, turning to the crown’s position, the prosecutor argued
that she knew coming out covid that doing in person trials was going to be a
problem. she argued that unlike in
r. v. j.m.
,
2017 oncj 4
where the crown did not take steps to mitigate delay, the emails she sent dated may 27, 2024, and october 11, 2024,
to the director of crown operations about the lack of internet connectivity in
poa
courtrooms in toronto
demonstrate that she was proactive in trying to prevent the issue she encountered
on the first day of trial. she argued this because her emails led to the
installation of mi-fi eggs
in or around january 30, 2025. in short, the prosecution argued that it was:
“the
position of the crown that having taken steps to mitigate the shortfalls that
are as a direct result of court’s administration city of toronto choosing not
to have…internet access in the post-pandemic world where everything literally
revolves around the use of technology”
the internet connectivity issue
that arose on the first day of trial was a discrete event and therefore an
exceptional circumstance. the fact that a prosecutor must make these types of
arguments when a court is tasked with deciding whether a defendant’s 11b rights
were infringed means as the defence argued that:
[t]here’s
something wrong when a criminal justice system, and here the
provincial
offences act
, the administration of that system, has the accused, in an
adversarial position, relying on the crown for access to internet by a personal
wi-fi that the crown has set up for just itself, and the court system itself
has not made available to people it prosecutes or hears being prosecuted.
there’s something fundamentally wrong with that.
with that said, with the greatest
amount of respect, the internet connectivity
issue
that arose on the first day of trial was not a discrete event. therefore, it cannot
be treated as an exceptional circumstance.
as paciocco j, as he was then, said in
r. v. m. (j.)
,
2017 oncj 4
at paragraph
161
:
161
i know that the loss of this time was not the
fault of the prosecuting crown. delay caused by a lack of technical support is
nonetheless state caused delay. it is not unlike delay caused by the
unavailability of interpreters,
10
or of courts or judges. the time lost may
have been outside the control of the prosecutor, but, on the evidence before
me, it was not outside the control of the state.
in this case the loss of time on
the first day of trial was not the fault of the prosecutor. nevertheless,
despite that it was out of the control of the prosecutor in this matter, the delay
caused by a lack of technology in the court and a need for a work around that
required technical support, which led to a delay in starting the defendant’s
trial on day one, is state caused delay. it is because the crown is an
indivisible actor as acknowledged by the prosecution in answer to a question
from the court during submissions. therefore, the loss of time, when
calculating whether the 18-month ceiling has been breached, must be attributed
to delay on part of the crown.
the technology issues in toronto
poa
courts cannot be considered
a discrete event in this case like the technology issues were in
r. v. simeu
,
2024 onsc 1031
: see para 54. they cannot because the city has made a deliberate
decision not to install internet in any of the 29 poa courts across toronto as
noted in the materials filed by prosecutor. whereas in
simeu
it was not
a lack of technology in the courtroom but rather with the technology “being down”,
which is a circumstance outside the crown’s control.
in 2016 the city tore down the existing slmn and began construction a
new slmn building, which houses one of its three poa court locations. during
construction the city had to contend with the covid-19 pandemic, which
necessitated the pivot from a paper based in person court system to a fully
electronic system and then a hybrid system. despite this the city choose not to
pivot and alter the construction plans for the new slmn building. further, despite
the effects of the covid-19 pandemic on the poa court system in toronto the
city did not install internet in the courtrooms located at its other 2 poa
court locations after the covid-19 pandemic abated.
as the prosecutor in her submissions said, the “current policy or
position of the city of toronto with respect to internet in the courtrooms…is
appalling.” this court agrees. as argued by the defence in their submissions, the
state cannot be forgiven for what it doesn’t provide when it prosecutes
accuseds.” again, this court agrees.
this court does not excoriate the city of toronto for its lack of
investment in internet in its courtrooms lightly. rather it does so to drive
home the point that in this electronic age the state has an obligation to equip
its courtroom with the required technology. if the state does not live up to
that obligation, then it runs the risk of having prosecutions stayed if the
lack of resourcing causes delay in prosecuting individuals in their court
system under 18 or 30 months as the case maybe.
for the foregoing reasons the prosecution has not established the
presence of exceptional circumstances that would rebut the presumption of
unreasonable delay: see
coulter
at para
37
. therefore, the court now
turns to analyzing whether the matter before the court was so complex that the
presumption of unreasonableness can be dislodged.
(b)
was the defendant’s case complex?
the prosecution, if it can demonstrate that the case was complex, can
also rebut the presumption of unreasonableness: see
coulter
at para
37
. however, this case was not complex as was conceded by
the prosecution on february 27, 2025: see
battiston
at para
45
.
therefore, again, the prosecution has not established the presence of
exceptional circumstances that would rebut the presumption of unreasonable
delay.
conclusion
after accounting for exceptional circumstances, the net delay does not
fall below 18-months. as a result, the onus does not shift back to the defence
(
coulter
at para
40
.) therefore, the length of time the defendant’s
matter takes must be considered presumptively unreasonable and a violation of
their 11b rights.
the defendant sought a stay of proceedings. if the court finds
that the defendant’s 11b rights were violated a stay is the only remedy that a
court can order: see
battiston
at para(s) 74 and 75,
r. v. charley
2019
onca 726
,
147 o.r. (3d) 497
, and
r. v. hartling
2020 onca 243
,
150 o.r. (3d) 224
.
for the foregoing reasons this court finds that
the defendant’s 11b rights have been infringed upon. therefore, a stay of proceedings
in this matter is ordered pursuant to
s. 24(1)
of the
charter
.
released:  april
10, 2025
signed:
justice of the peace r. shawyer
this court’s decision in
toronto (city of) v. battiston,
2025 oncj 162
for
a detailed chronological history of the defendant’s charges before the court.
prior to the closing of old city hall (“och”) in toronto och was the only poa
court in toronto with internet connectivity because it used to operate as both
a criminal and poa court. when och closed on february 27, 2025, no poa
courthouse in toronto had internet connectivity. this became the situation in
toronto poa courts despite the opening of a new poa courthouse located at 92
front street east at the new st. lawrence farmers market also known as st.
lawrence market north (“slmn”).
mifi devices are compact, battery-powered routers
that function like mobile hotspots, enabling internet access through a cellular
network. they use a sim card to connect to a mobile network (like 4g or
5g), and then create a wi-fi signal that other devices (phones, tablets,
laptops) can connect to. further, mifi devices are generally used in situations
where a person needs internet access away from home or a wi-fi network, such as
travel, remote work, or areas with limited internet infrastructure.