ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. leclair
, 2025 oncj 174
date:  2025 04 01
court file no.:  windsor
22-81103420
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
cory
leclair
before justice s.
g. pratt
sentencing
submissions heard on 12 february 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 1 april 2025
s. odom................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
m. ertel.........................................................................................
counsel for the defendant
reasons
for sentence
pratt j.:
on
3 december 2024, i found the offender cory leclair guilty of two offences: the
unlicensed possession of a prohibited firearm, and the possession of a loaded
prohibited firearm.  my complete reasons for conviction can be
found at
2024
oncj 624
.  i heard sentencing submissions on 12 february 2025.  these are my
reasons for sentence.
facts
my
detailed factual findings are set out in the reasons for conviction cited
above.  briefly, the offender was with two people in downtown windsor the night
of the offences.  an altercation broke out with another group as the offender
and jamie labelle crossed riverside drive.  that altercation led to mr. labelle
producing a handgun from a satchel he was carrying.  after the other group
fled, the offender took the gun and satchel and left the area.  shortly
afterward, he put the satchel under the vehicle belonging to the third person
in their group, christina roberts.  it is this possession, from the end of the
altercation to his deposit of the firearm under the car, that led to his
convictions.
positions of the parties
crown
counsel seeks a three-year penitentiary term.  this sentence, it is argued, is
in keeping with the seriousness of the offence and the danger the offender
created by his actions that night.
defence
counsel seeks a conditional sentence of two years less one day, followed by two
years of probation.  he points to the offender’s antecedents and low risk of
re-offending in support of this position.  he also recommends the offender be
ordered to perform a significant amount of community service as part of his
sentence.
there
are several ancillary orders that must accompany the sentence imposed.  these
were not opposed by the offender’s counsel.
the pre-sentence report
i
have had the benefit of a pre-sentence report (psr) provided by probation officer
rebecca rowsell.  ms. rowsell is from the ottawa probation office and completed
the report because that is where the offender resides.
the
psr described a very difficult upbringing for the offender.  he was raised by
his mother.  he had no relationship with his father until his teenage years.
before that, he was told repeatedly by his mother what a bad person his father
was.  he was also the regular target of verbal abuse by both his mother and
grandmother.  his cousin, richard guertin, recalled them telling the offender
things like “you’re useless, you’re just like your father” and “you’re a waste
of space” on a regular basis.  the home was an unstable one where meeting
everyday needs was a struggle.
the
offender told ms. rowsell he felt he’d been raised by the streets.  despite
this lack of support in the home, and despite those streets being in the
economically-challenged area of vanier, the offender managed to complete high
school.  he left school for a period after the birth of his first child, but
returned and earned his diploma.  he has since obtained a certification as a
security guard, and now owns his own construction business.  at the age of 18,
the offender taught himself to read.
while
the offender does not hold indigenous status, his family does have indigenous
heritage.  his grandmother experienced firsthand the damage caused by
residential schools.  mr. guertin noted that alcoholism runs in the family.  i
suspect those points are not unrelated.
the
offender has seven children, ranging in age from 3 to 20.  he currently resides
with his 20-year-old son and 14-year-old daughter.  he is involved in family
court proceedings where he is trying to obtain custody of his other children.
according to the psr, the offender takes great pride in being a father and
wants to set a good example for his children.
regarding
alcohol and substance use, the offender says his drinking is not problematic.  while
he drank heavily in his time as a security guard working in the night club
industry, that is no longer the case.  the more concerning issue is his heavy
use of marijuana.  he told ms. rowsell that he uses approximately one ounce of
marijuana every 2-3 days.  this is a significant amount being consumed on a
daily basis.  he said he uses it in part to address ongoing back pain, but even
mr. guertin observed that the offender could “significantly reduce his use of
the substance.”
when
asked about the offences, the offender maintained his innocence.  that is his
right, and i take nothing from it.  he went on to express his concern for
bystanders, noting that someone could have been hurt.  it’s not clear if he’s
referring to mr. labelle’s use of the firearm or his own hiding of it
afterward, but it’s positive that he at least acknowledges the danger the situation
presented.
overall,
the psr is positive.  despite an abusive childhood growing up in a difficult part
of the city, the offender finished high school and obtained steady employment.
he now owns his own business.  he is a father with a clear desire to be in his
children’s lives.  his cousin mr. guertin says he is a good person who wants to
help others.  the psr mentioned his involvement in charitable activities.  he
has no prior criminal record.
i
am a bit concerned, however, that some of the offender’s social contacts may be
less than positive influences on him.  most obvious on this point is mr.
labelle.  on the night of the offences, he was walking around downtown windsor,
extremely intoxicated, with a loaded handgun concealed in a bag.  his judgment was
so poor that he immediately produced the gun when an argument started with a
group of strangers.  that decision led to the offender’s decision to hide the
gun, which led to his conviction.  the offender described mr. labelle as his
brother.  if the offender is serious in his desire to live a positive life and
to be a good father, he can’t associate with armed criminals.  it’s really that
simple.
principles of sentencing
offences
involving firearms are treated very seriously by parliament.  the toll taken on
canadian society by gun crime is as clear as it is heartbreaking.  those who
choose to engage in criminal activity using firearms will be treated harshly
the courts.  society demands nothing less.
denunciation
and deterrence must be given paramount consideration by a sentencing court.
sentencing objectives like rehabilitation and reintegration cannot be ignored,
but they must be subordinate.  the protection of society must be a sentencing
court’s guiding motivation.
not
all firearm offences, however, are created equal.  for example, the use of a
firearm in the commission of an offence is likely to be seen as more serious
than simply possessing that firearm without using it.  even possession offences
can vary widely in their commission.  this was the supreme court of canada’s
observation
in
r.
v.
nur
2015 scc 15 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 15
, where the
three-year mandatory minimum sentence for offences under s. 95 was ruled
unconstitutional.  possession can take many different forms and occur under
many different contexts.  the impact on public safety will depend on the
surrounding circumstances.
the
criminal code
also directs sentencing judges to impose sentences that are
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the level of responsibility of
the offender.  further, s. 718.2(d) and (e) state as follows:
(d) an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e) all available
sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances
and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be
considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of
aboriginal offenders.
counsel
for the offender seeks a conditional sentence of imprisonment.  these sentences
are governed by s. 742 and onward.  section 742.1 sets out when conditional
sentences can be imposed:
742.1
if a person is convicted of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment
of less than two years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the
offender’s behaviour in the community, order that the offender serve the
sentence in the community, subject to the conditions imposed under section
742.3, if
(a) the court is
satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger
the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
(b) the offence is
not an offence punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment;
(c) the offence is
not an offence under any of the following provisions:
(i)
section 239, for which a sentence is imposed under paragraph 239(1)(b) (attempt
to commit murder),
(ii)
section 269.1 (torture), or
(iii)
section 318 (advocating genocide); and
(d) the offence is
not a terrorism offence, or a criminal organization offence, prosecuted by way
of indictment, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more.
the
imposition of a conditional sentence is not precluded by paragraphs b, c, or
d.  crown counsel concedes the sentence is legally available.  i will consider
s. 742.1(a) later in these reasons.
caselaw
the
crown provided several cases in support of its position.  like most sentencing
authorities, none are entirely similar factually but all provide some guidance
to me.
the
case of
r.
v.
serrano and samaniego
2018 onsc 6785
bears some
factual similarity to the case at bar.  samaniego was denied entry into a bar
by security.  he showed the guard he had a gun.  he passed that gun to serrano,
who entered the club.  when he later exited the club, he dropped the gun.  he
picked it up and the two left the area.  police were called when the dropped
gun was seen, and the pair were quickly apprehended.  when police caught up to
them, serrano was seen to throw the gun on the ground.  like the offender, it
is not alleged serrano did anything with the gun other than hold it (ostensibly
for samaniego).  both were convicted following trial.
serrano
was 36 years old with a limited criminal record.  he had family support and had
been employed until he was involved in a motor vehicle collision.
the
evidence showed serrano was in possession of the gun for less than four
minutes.  he was in the club with the gun for 30-40 seconds.  the 911 call was
made at 101am, and police had the gun located and secured by 104am.
in
the end, serrano was sentenced to 31 months and 3 weeks of imprisonment.  this
was upheld by the court of appeal at
2020 onca 439
.
there
are several similarities between serrano and the offender:
(1)
both
cases involve sentencing post-trial;
(2)
both
involve brief possession of a firearm primarily held by another party;
(3)
both
involve discarding of the firearm;
(4)
both
are otherwise prosocial individuals with family and community support;
(5)
both
support their children; and
(6)
both
served long periods on judicial interim release without incident.
the
case of
r.
v.
blagrove-robinson
, an unreported 2022 decision of
justice himel of the ontario superior court of justice, is factually quite
different and objectively more serious.  that offender was on bail awaiting
sentencing for drug offences when he was apprehended with a loaded handgun, a
large amount of money, and approximately 800g of a “white, crystalline
substance”, though i note the substance was not identified and no plea was
entered with regard to it.
that
offender was sentenced to 3 ½ years on the s. 95(1) offence, in addition to
other sentences for other counts.  here, the crown relies on it for support in
their argument for a three-year sentence.
there
are important differences between blagrove-robinson and the offender.
blagrove-robinson’s conduct was objectively more serious when he brought a
loaded firearm into a shopping mall.  he had pleaded guilty to very serious
drug charges and was violating the terms of his bail at the time of the firearm
offence.  while i agree the case provides a useful review of sentencing
principles in firearms cases, the sentence ultimately imposed on
blagrove-robinson arose from factors not present in the case at bar.
r.
v.
francis
2022 onca 729
was a sentence appeal where the court of appeal reduced the
offender’s sentence for possessing a loaded firearm and possession of drugs for
the purpose of trafficking from seven years to five years.  the appeal reminded
sentencing courts of the need to emphasize denunciation and deterrence while
not ignoring other sentencing principles.  it also focused on the concept of
restraint when imposing a first sentence of incarceration.  while the decision
discussed restraint in the context of a “youthful” first offender (francis was
23 years old at the time of the offences), the principle applies to all
offenders facing their first prison sentence.
even
giving restraint its proper application, and despite his positive
rehabilitative prospects, he was still sentenced to five years custody.
the
case of
r.
v.
raybe
2024 onsc 7077
involved an offender who
pleaded guilty to two counts of possessing a loaded firearm contrary to s.
95(1).  each count arose from a separate incident.  most importantly, each arose
from encounters where raybe fired the gun.  in the first, no one fired at
raybe.  in the second, he was in his vehicle returning fire that had come from
another vehicle.  in that exchange, he was shot in the shoulder.  justice
goldstein reviewed the offender’s circumstances and imposed two 3 ½ year
sentences, to be served consecutively.
finally,
in
r.
v.
walters
2023 onca 4
, the court of appeal upheld a total
sentence of 38 months for a combination of drug and gun offences related to a
loaded handgun, two overcapacity magazines, additional ammunition, and two
baggies with approximately 7g of cocaine.  these items were found in a bedroom
closet and night table.  the facts surrounding the possession of that firearm
are clearly quite different from those surrounding the offender’s possession.
the
notion that a conditional sentence can be imposed for s. 95(1) offences is not
entirely novel.  in the case of
r.
v.
moye
o.j. no. 4076
(c.j.)
, the offender got into an argument with a bar employee.  police were
called.  on searching moye, they found a loaded .22 calibre handgun in his
satchel, together with 40 additional rounds.  he pleaded guilty to an offence
under s. 95(1).  the crown sought a three-year prison sentence, while the
defence argued for a conditional sentence of two years less a day.
moye
came before the court with a challenging history.  his family had arrived in
canada as sudanese refugees, fleeing civil war.  he had difficulties in school
and serious problems with drugs and alcohol.  he said the offence was committed
due to financial pressures and debts.  since the offence, his family noted a
drastic improvement in his behaviour.  justice west was satisfied moye had
strong rehabilitative prospects, and that therefore he had to balance
denunciation and deterrence with rehabilitation and restraint.
his
honour quoted with approval the words of justice wagner (as he then was)
in the
case of
r.
v.
lacasse
2015 scc 64 (canlii)
,
3 s.c.r.1089
, at paragraphs
57 and
58
:
57  sentencing
ranges are nothing more than summaries of the minimum and maximum sentences
imposed in the past, which serve in any given case as guides for the
application of all the relevant principles and objectives. however, they should
not be considered "averages", let alone straitjackets, but should
instead be seen as historical portraits for the use of sentencing judges, who
must still exercise their discretion in each case:
even when an
appellate court has established a range, it may be that a fact pattern will
arise, which is sufficiently dissimilar to past decisions that the
"range", as it were, must be expanded. the fundamental point is that
a "range" is not a straitjacket to the exercise of discretion of a
sentencing judge. (r. v. keepness,
2010 skca 69
,
359 sask. r. 34
, at para.
24
)
58  there will
always be situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range:
although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the
fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a
unique profile cannot be disregarded. the determination of a just and
appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a
purely mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that are
[page1119] difficult to define with precision. this is why it may happen that a
sentence that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may
never have been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably
unfit. once again, everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the
offender's degree of responsibility and the specific circumstances of each
case. lebel j. commented as follows on this subject:
a judge can order
a sentence outside that range as long as it is in accordance with the
principles and objectives of sentencing. thus, a sentence falling outside the
regular range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily unfit. regard must be
had to all the circumstances of the offence and the offender, and to the needs
of the community in which the offence occurred. (nasogaluak, at para. 44)
his
honour also cited justice copeland, then of the superior court of justice, who
noted at paragraph 76 of
r.
v.
stewart
o.j. no. 4656
(s.c.j.)
that:
the court of appeal has also recognized
that in some cases, particularly those involving young adults with no criminal
record and good prospects for rehabilitation, a conditional sentence of
imprisonment may be an appropriate sentence even for serious firearm possession
offences: morris at paras. 124-28, 180-81; desmond-robinson.
while
i might not call the offender a “young adult” at the time of the offences – he
was 35 years old – i would still find these principles to be available for
application.  there should be no age cutoff beyond which sentencing options
cease to be applicable.  keeping all options open underscores the
individualized nature of the sentencing process.  courts should be open to
impose sentences they deem fit, so long as they reflect consideration of
appropriate principles and the overarching purpose of sentencing.
in
the end, justice west imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a day.
the court took into account the rehabilitative efforts made by moye together
with his difficult upbringing and prospects for a productive future.
certainly,
one important factor in that offender’s favour that is missing from the case at
bar is the mitigation of a guilty plea.
in
the case of
r.
v.
papilota
o.j. no. 3567 (s.c.j.)
, justice
himel (the trial judge in
blagrove-robinson
,
supra
) sentenced an
offender to a conditional sentence of two years less a day following a guilty
plea to the illegal possession of  an unloaded shotgun and a loaded handgun,
together with additional ammunition for both, inside a residence.  papilota was
32 years old and had no prior record.  he owned a business that managed a staff
of six.  he had been compliant with his bail conditions and had good
rehabilitative prospects.
at
paragraph 48 of the decision, justice himel stated:
i have considered
the need for denunciation and deterrence in this case. however, i am mindful
that mr. papilota is relatively young, has no criminal record and has stable
family and friends who support him. he has a business which has proven to be
successful and in which he employs five people; he wishes to continue this
business with his partner. permitting mr. papilota to serve his sentence in the
community will allow him to continue his rehabilitation and be a productive
member of society. in reaching this sentence i am mindful that mr. papilota has
been on a release to reside with his sureties with strict house arrest for a
portion of it and a less strict release permitting him to work and be subject
to a curfew. these terms that have been in place since his release on february
17, 2022, following his arrest and are a factor i consider in fashioning the
appropriate sentence as is
discussed in r. v. downes,
(2006),
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca)
,
205 c.c.c. (3d)
488 (ont. c.a.)
.
a
lot of what papilota had going for him applies to the offender as well: he is
relatively young, has no prior record, owns his own business, and is otherwise
a productive member of society.  he has also been on bail for nearly 18 months
without incident.
again,
what is missing is the mitigation of a guilty plea.  as well, the context of
the possession is different.  papilota had the firearms in his residence, while
the offender personally possessed the firearm before discarding it under the
roberts vehicle.
in
summary, while a conditional sentence of imprisonment may be an unusual outcome
in a case of firearm possession, it is not unheard of.
aggravating and mitigating factors
any
illegal possession of a loaded firearm is a serious criminal offence.  there
are features in this case that make it even more so.
first,
the location of the possession is significant.  unlike, for example, the
offender in
papilota
,
supra
, this firearm was not possessed in
the confines of a residence.  it was on a public street in downtown windsor.
this presented a grave danger to the public, even at that late hour.  the prior
consumption of alcohol and the angry altercation with the other group further
add to the seriousness and danger of the situation.
the
manner in which the firearm was dealt with by the offender is also
aggravating.  he did not return it to mr. labelle or surrender it to police.
instead, he hid it under the roberts vehicle and left it unattended.  this
increased the potential danger the firearm represented.
that
said, it is not as though he left it in plain view on a street corner in the
middle of the day.  it was in a bag and hidden under his friend’s vehicle late
at night.  the offender presumably expected ms. roberts to show up shortly
afterward.  had amer kadri not happened to be sitting in the vehicle next to
it, it would likely never have been found before ms. roberts returned to the
car and collected it.  the way in which the offender discarded the gun is
aggravating, but it is not on par with the actions
in
serrano
,
supra
,
where the defendant threw the gun away when confronted by police.
the
crown argues that the offender not being licensed to possess firearms is an
aggravating factor.  i must respectfully disagree as not holding a valid
license is an element of each offence.  i cannot use an element of an offence
as an aggravating factor (
see:
lacasse
,
supra
).
the
primary mitigating factor is the lack of a prior record.  the crown argued that
this is not a mitigating factor but rather the lack of an aggravating factor.
again, i disagree.  the caselaw is replete with references to the lack of a
prior record being a mitigating factor, including the supreme court of canada
accepting that reasoning by the trial judge
in
r.
v.
friesen
2020 scc 9 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 100
.  a person’s status as a first-time offender is almost
always an important mitigating circumstance.
that
the offender has managed to stay out of trouble for the first 3 ½ decades of
his life, despite an abusive upbringing and negative peers, speaks well of his
rehabilitative prospects and strengthens the idea that this was out of
character for him.  he has held stable employment and now owns a business.  he
is active in his community.  these are all good things.
it
is also in his favour that he has been on bail for the last 17 ½ months without
incident.  this speaks to his ability to follow the rules and informs my
decision on the type of sentence i should impose.
the
one mitigating factor glaring in its omission is the lack of a guilty plea.  i
do not say that to suggest he should not have maintained the presumption of
innocence through this trial, or put the crown to the proof of its case.
rather, i mention it as a potentially important distinguishing factor that sets
his case apart from those cited above where conditional sentences were imposed.
counsel
also pointed to the brief period of possession in this case.  while i agree the
specific circumstances of this case show possession for only a short period of
time, there is no minimum time requirement set out in the sections.  to put it
another way, any illegal firearm possession is bad; it can be made even worse
by aggravating circumstances, but brevity of possession is not mitigating.
analysis
is
a conditional sentence appropriate in this case?  the answer turns on my
application of s. 742.1(a).  again, that portion of the
criminal code
states
the following:
742.1 if a person
is convicted of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of
less than two years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the
offender’s behaviour in the community, order that the offender serve the
sentence in the community, subject to the conditions imposed under section
742.3, if
(a) the court is
satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger
the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
first,
i must consider if a sentence of less than two years is appropriate.  only if
that answer is yes do i then go on to consider if a conditional sentence would
endanger the safety of the community or be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing.
i
recognize the significant caselaw that suggests three years is the starting
point for illegal firearm possession that does not fall into the
quasi-regulatory category of offences.  three years was the mandatory minimum
sentence set by parliament until it was struck down
in
nur
, supra.  even
after the supreme court’s decision, three years was widely accepted as the
starting point for illegal firearm possession undertaken in a criminal context.
the
law, however, has not remained static.  several of the cases i’ve noted above
allow for greater discretion on the part of a sentencing judge.  sentences of
less than three years have been imposed in circumstances similar to (or
arguably worse than) the present case.  given the lack of a mandatory minimum
sentence, and the disparity in various courts’ treatment of the offence, i find
a sentence of less than two years for this offender would be within the range
of fit sentences available to me.  even lacking the strong mitigation of a
guilty plea, i find the offender’s circumstances, together with the unique genesis
of his possession, allow for a reformatory sentence in this case.
i
turn now to paragraph (a) of s. 742.1.  before i do, i pause to make a few
observations of what a conditional sentence actually is.
from
r.
v.
proulx
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
,
1 s.c.r. 61
onward, courts have been clear
that a conditional sentence is a jail sentence.  it is not probation.  chief
justice lamer compared the two regimes in detail, beginning at paragraph 23.  a
conditional sentence is a sentence of custody an offender is given the
opportunity to begin serving in the community.  whether they complete the
sentence in the community is entirely up to them.  the consequences of
breaching a conditional sentence are much harsher than breaching a probation
order: the presumption is that whatever remains of the conditional sentence at
the time of the breach will be served in a jail cell.  a breach of a probation
order may lead to a charge under s. 733.1.  this charge would carry with it all
the charter protections to which criminal defendants are entitled.  they would
be presumed innocent.  if the crown wanted them to stay in custody pending
trial, they would have to convince a court that detention is necessary
(assuming s. 515(6) does not apply).  at trial, the crown would have to prove
their guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  the procedure on a breach of a
conditional sentence is very different.  the crown need only show a breach on a
balance of probabilities.  once that is done, there is no burden on the crown
to explain why custody is a necessary result.  the burden is on the offender to
explain why it isn’t.
further,
it is entirely possible to craft a conditional sentence that would achieve the
goals of denunciation and deterrence in an appropriate case.  conditional
sentences can be punitive while simultaneously encouraging rehabilitation and
reintegration into the community.
would
a conditional sentence in this case endanger the safety of the community?
after careful consideration of the circumstances of this offence and this
offender, i find the answer is no.  conditions could be structured to manage
whatever risk the offender may pose.  in making that determination, i consider
the way in which these offences were committed.  the offender was with two
people, one of whom was armed with a gun.  there is no evidence the offender
knew that. when a group of strangers and mr. labelle took issue with each
other, ms. roberts immediately inserted herself into the situation.  rather
than escalate the altercation, the offender stayed back and was himself
assaulted.  even after that, he remained a distance away from the developing
melee.  only after it was done and the strangers had departed did he take the
satchel and firearm from mr. labelle.  to that point, the offender had been
chiefly focused on helping mr. labelle walk upright and cross the street
safely.
once
he took possession of the gun, he walked a short distance and hid it under ms.
roberts’ car.  he did not keep it or brandish it himself.  he did not remove it
from the bag.  his goal, it would seem, was to remove the gun from the scene
and protect the person he referred to in the psr as being like his brother.
the
offender was not a participant in the violent encounter between the strangers
and his friends.  he was not looking for trouble.  his actions following that
encounter were reckless, hazardous, and illegal, but his conduct is not that of
a dangerous criminal.  adding to these circumstances the fact that he has no
prior criminal record leads me to the conclusion that a conditional sentence
with sufficiently restrictive terms would not endanger the safety of the
community.
on
that point, i also note the offender is no stranger to following conditions.
for the last 17 ½ months he has obeyed the conditions of his release without
incident.  this supports the notion that he would similarly follow the terms of
a conditional sentence.
finally,
would a conditional sentence be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing?  those principles include protecting society and
fostering respect for the law.  sentences achieve those goals through the use
of sanctions that denounce and deter illegal conduct, and that help to
rehabilitate offenders.  any sentence, whether custodial or not, must be
proportional to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.
i
must prioritize denunciation and deterrence.  without question, the offender’s
crimes are serious.  but i cannot ignore the prospects of rehabilitation for a
stable 35-year-old first offender with a job and family responsibilities.  but
for this one incident, he has stayed out of trouble and been a productive
citizen despite growing up in a difficult area with several personal
challenges.  he is clearly a person who can succeed when he sets his mind to
it.  denunciation and deterrence must be the paramount considerations.  they
cannot be the exclusive considerations.
taking
the guiding caselaw into account, together with the will of parliament as
enacted in the
criminal code
, and most importantly the specific facts of this
case and of this offender, i find a lengthy and punitive conditional sentence
would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
such a sentence would send the message that firearm possession, regardless of
the circumstances, will attract a custodial sentence.  even momentary
possession only motivated by a desire to help a friend will result in a long
jail sentence.  giving the offender the chance to begin that sentence in the
community will honour the principles of restraint and proportionality.  if the
offender squanders this chance, he should understand what is likely waiting for
him.
sentence
the
offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
a
sentence of two years less one day, to be served as a conditional sentence.
terms of the conditional sentence, in addition to the statutory terms, will be:
(a)
report
in person to a supervisor within two working days of today’s date and after
that, at all times and places as directed by the supervisor or any person
authorized by a supervisor to assist in your supervision.
(b)
co-operate
with your supervisor.  you must sign any releases necessary to permit the
supervisor to monitor your compliance and you must provide proof of compliance
with any condition of this order to your supervisor on request.
(c)
live
at a place approved of by the supervisor and not change that address without
obtaining the consent of the supervisor in advance.
(d)
the
home confinement condition will be in effect for the full duration of the
sentence.  you are to remain in your residence or on the property of your
residence at all times except:
(i)
between
the hours of 12pm – 4pm each saturday in order to acquire the necessities of
life;
(ii)
for
any medical emergency involving you or any member of your immediate family;
(iii)
for
going directly to and from or being at school, employment, court attendances,
religious services and legal or medical or dental appointments;
(iv)
for
going directly to or from and being at assessment, treatment or counselling
sessions;
(v)
for
going directly to or from and performing community service hours; and
(vi)
for
carrying out any legal obligations regarding compliance with this conditional
sentence order.
(e)
do
not associate or communicate in any way, by any physical, electronic or other
means, or be in the company of jamie labelle or christina roberts.
(f)
do
not be within 100m of any place where you know any of the above named persons
to live, work, go to school, or any place you know the persons to be except for
required court attendances.
(g)
do
not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
.
(h)
do
not buy, possess or consume alcohol or other intoxicating substances.
(i)
do
not possess or consume any unlawful drugs or substances except with a valid
prescription in your name or those available over the counter.
(j)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed by the supervisor and complete them to the satisfaction of
the supervisor for substance abuse.
(k)
perform
150 hours of community service work on a rate and schedule to be directed by
the supervisor.
(2)
following
his conditional sentence, the offender will be placed on probation for a period
of two years.  probationary terms, in addition to the statutory terms, will be:
(a)
do
not associate or communicate in any way, by any physical, electronic or other means,
or be in the company of jamie labelle or christina roberts.
(b)
do
not be within 100m of any place where you know any of the above named persons
to live, work, go to school, or any place you know the persons to be except for
required court attendances.
(c)
do
not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
.
(3)
the
offender will provide a sample of his dna to the windsor police service for
inclusion in the national dna databank on or before 30 april 2025.  this order
will apply to both counts as both are secondary dna offences.
(4)
there
will be a weapons prohibition under
s. 109
of the
criminal code
for ten years.
(5)
there
will be an order under
s. 491
of the
criminal code
for the forfeiture of the
firearm in question to his majesty the king.
(6)
finally,
there will be a $200 victim surcharge on each offence, payable within six
months.
supervision
of the conditional sentence and of probation can be transferred to the city of
ottawa if the offender desires.
the
offender needs to understand this is an unusual sentence for these offences.  he
should not take the chance he’s being given lightly.
released:
1 april 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt