ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. sanchez-neria
, 2025 oncj 209
date:
2025 03 28
court
file no.:  brampton 23-3947
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
rodolfo sanchez-neria
before
justice m.c.t. lai
heard
on march 7, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 28, 2025
helena gluzman................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
jeffrey hartman............................................................................... counsel
for the accused
lai j.:
a.        overview
rodolfo sanchez-neria is 22 years old. he has no
criminal record. he agreed to kill harpreet hanjra in exchange for money. he
planned to do it when mr. hanjra was driving his 6-year-old daughter to school.
on the morning of december 13, 2023, mr. hanjra was driving to school with his
daughter in the backseat. mr. sanchez-neria pulled up beside them, discharged four
rounds from a handgun into the passenger side window, and drove away. three
rounds struck mr. hanjra in the right arm. one round struck him in the left
arm. he was taken to hospital and later released. his daughter was not struck.
mr. sanchez-neria has been in custody since december
15, 2023. when these reasons are released, he will have served 470 real days in
custody. he has experienced exceptionally harsh pre-trial conditions, including
lockdowns, triple-bunking, unhygienic conditions, and anxiety about an ongoing outbreak
of a contagious disease.
crown counsel seeks a sentence of 10 years, less
pre-trial credit, with ancillary orders.  defence counsel seeks a global
sentence of 8 years, less pre-trial credit at a ratio of 2:1. defence counsel
does not contest the ancillary orders.
for the following reasons, i impose a sentence
of 8.5 years. this is the equivalent of 3,102 days. mr. sanchez-neria has
already served 470 real days, for which i will credit him with 705 days (at
1.5:1). this leaves mr. sanchez-neria with 2,397 days (about 6 years and 7
months) left to serve.
b.        the admitted facts
on december 11, 2023, mr. sanchez-neria sent a
message to “t” that read: “imma drop the [firearm] and go drop my dawgs”.
on december 12, 2023, mr. sanchez-neria sent a
message to “t” to the effect that he would be making money tomorrow morning. he
then exchanged messages with “adam hacker” and “kp” about the shooting,
including the price, target, plan, and agreement. kp and mr. sanchez-neria
communicated through adam hacker. in short:
•
kp wrote, “let me know asap if you want to do it
i get you info. will pay you 40, bro. passed you 10 already. if not all good
bro ill get someone else. but let me know asap”.
•
kp wrote, “indian uncle leaves to drop his kid
off every morning. he doesn’t leave the house otherwise because he knows he is
in trouble”.
•
mr. sanchez-neria wrote, “let’s get it done”.
adam hacker then sent mr. sanchez-neria details
about mr. hanjra’s address and vehicles, and instructions to be there at 7:30
a.m. because mr. hanjra left at 8 – 8:30 a.m. to drop off his kid.
mr. sanchez-neria sent “skeng” a screenshot of adam
hacker’s instructions and provided further instructions to be there early,
“don’t miss him”, and “yo call me the plays ready”.
on december 13, 2023, mr. hanjra was driving
west on mayfield road. his 6-year-old daughter was sitting in a booster seat in
the back. he was driving her to school. around 8:20 a.m., he stopped at the
intersection of torbram rd. to make a left turn. mr. sanchez-neria pulled up
beside him. he discharged 4 rounds into the passenger side window, striking mr.
hanjra four times.
the shooting was captured on the rear-facing
dash camera of a civilian witness whose car had been just in front of mr.
hanjra in the left-turn lane. the footage shows other vehicles driving in both
directions on torbram rd. the civilian witness’ vehicle is inching forward into
the intersection when mr. sanchez-neria drives up beside mr. hanjra, holds a firearm
out of his driver’s side window, fires shots into mr. hanjra’s passenger side
window, and continues forward. the shooting causes the civilian witness to
swerve into the path of oncoming traffic, almost causing a collision. the
civilian witness turns his head from side to side to look behind him, and
abruptly pulls over onto the right-hand shoulder as mr. sanchez-neria drives
past him and out of sight.
mr. hanjra suffered one penetrating gun shot
wound and two gun shot abrasions to his right arm, and one non-penetrating gun
shot wound to his left arm. he was transported to hospital and later released.
his daughter was not struck.
later that day and into december 14, 2023, mr. sanchez-neria
conducted internet searches and sent messages relating to the shooting. the
following are of particular note:
•
on december 13, 2023, mr. sanchez-neria messaged
“keesha”:
o
(11:55 a.m.) “like bro they telling me bc i hit
him and he didn’t pass that i may not get no money”
o
(11:56 a.m.) “i was told to wait outside his
crib and then now i should’ve done it at the school”
o
(4:18 p.m.) “this nogga survived and is mocking
me”, “bout oh he missed you’re a good my daughter was in the back seat. pham
nah it’s personal now next one i won’t miss”
•
on december 14, 2023, mr. sanchez-neria messaged
“khaliyah clarence”: “i can’t be on imessage”, “i’m doing bigger plays now and
i deadass can’t have contact wit anyone unless it here”.
mr. sanchez-neria was arrested on december 15,
2023.
c.        mr. sanchez-neria’s
circumstances
(i)         mr. sanchez-neria’s
childhood and upbringing
mr. sanchez-neria was born in mexico city. he
has a younger sister,
rollini sanchez
, who was also born in mexico city, and a half-brother,
romano moreno
, who was born in canada.
mr. sanchez-neria’s childhood surroundings were
characterized by significant poverty, violence, and state corruption. his biological
father abused him and his mother,
ms.
rocio neria ordaz
. mr. sanchez-neria described his biological father as “very
violent” with “ties in high places”, who was “overconfident” and treated ms.
neria ordaz like property. ms. neria ordaz tried to leave the relationship
several times before she brought mr. sanchez-neria and his sister to live with their
maternal grandparents. their uncle and aunt also lived there. the adults would
sacrifice meals to ensure the children ate. they did not have regular access to
hot water or electricity. mr. sanchez-neria’s maternal family descends from
indigenous peoples whose traditional lands are in or near mexico city, and in
areas that experienced great economic deprivation following the colonial
period.
in 2007, when mr. sanchez-neria was 5 years old,
ms. neria ordaz brought him and his sister to canada, with the financial
assistance and support of his stepfather,
ricardo
moreno
. mr. moreno is the brother of mr.
sanchez-neria’s biological father. due to threats made by mr. sanchez-neria’s
biological father, ms. neria ordaz decided that remaining in canada was best
for the children’s safety. mr. moreno and ms. neria ordaz married in 2015.
the family spent two years in the guildwood area
of scarborough before moving into public housing at danzig street and
morningside avenue. his experiences were reminiscent of his time in mexico
city. he experienced food insecurity. he was surrounded by violence. he was
often surrounded by gang-affiliated individuals. his associations put him at
risk. he had been in knife fights, fist fights, and been shot at. in grade 11,
one of his best friends was stabbed to death. a month later, another close
friend was shot and killed. after a “war” broke out in 2019, he started losing
1-2 close friends on a monthly basis. by the time he was 18 years old, he decided
he did not want to end up in jail, and focussed on leaving that past behind
him.
mr. sanchez-neria also experienced “tremendous”
abuse between the ages of 7 and 15 years old at the hands of an undisclosed
individual, which made him desperate to leave the home environment. child
welfare authorities were involved but the issue was not resolved. when mr.
sanchez-neria was 15 years old, he became unhoused. he survived by
self-reliance. by the time he was 20 years old, he was either residing with a
partner or in a vehicle he had purchased.
(ii)        education and employment
mr. sanchez-neria successfully completed grade
12. he had a good rapport with his teachers and was a self-described “class
clown”. he was bullied in elementary school and, by high school, chose to fight
back. he became associated with “a bad crowd”, but team sports kept him out of
trouble. he was a talented rugby player and played at the provincial level. he
received a rugby scholarship to attend a post-secondary institution, but had to
leave after 2 weeks because of financial difficulties.
when he was as young as 14 years old, mr.
sanchez-neria began working at his stepfather’s landscaping company and doing
odd jobs in order to help make ends meet – especially after his stepfather had
a health crisis in 2015. mr. sanchez-neria has been employed in a number of areas,
including auto shops, restaurants, photography, and club promotion. he also started
his own interlocking business, although its growth has been hampered by
financial constraints. he is interested in trade school.
(iii)      physical and mental
health
mr. sanchez-neria began using alcohol as a
coping mechanism in grade 11, after the violent deaths of his two close
friends. his alcohol use became daily. he started combining it with other
substances, including percocet, ecstasy, and marijuana. when he was 20 years
old, he experienced suicidal ideation and began using fentanyl. he explained,
“once fentanyl came into my life, i took a turn for the worse, that drug
basically controlled me”. he used it to forget, to alleviate suicidality, and
to be able to “get up in the morning and go to work”. he described himself as a
“functioning user”. he said his usage “wasn’t a problem until it was too late”.
he was under the influence of substances at the time of the offence.
(iv)      personal life and support
system
mr. sanchez-neria has a positive relationship
with his mother. he describes her as “the strongest person i know” and his
“saviour”.
ms. neria ordaz
writes that mr. sanchez-neria has always been a protector for his
family. she speaks about his leadership skills, social skills, and business
skills – culminating in his own entertainment group. she knows mr.
sanchez-neria to be a respectful, empathetic, honest, and hardworking young man
who is full of life and joy. she told the author of the pre-sentence report
that she was in disbelief and did not understand how the son she knew could do
such a thing.
mr. sanchez-neria respects and looks up to his
stepfather, mr. moreno, for taking care of his family and treating his mother
well. mr. moreno writes that he is “super proud” of mr. sanchez-neria, and
particularly of his work ethic, drive, and ability to get along with other
people. he knows mr. sanchez-neria to be thoughtful, caring, honest, helpful,
patient, social, responsible, and hard working.
mr. sanchez-neria has a close relationship with
his younger sister, rollini. he “took most of the beatings for her” when they
were in mexico and will always look out for her. ms. sanchez-neria writes that
mr. sanchez-neria has always been there for her, through the good and the bad,
and that he would always listen if she was upset or feeling down. he always has
a smile on his face. he is generous, funny, and helpful. she told the author of
the pre-sentence report that “the person i know, as my brother, i didn’t know
he could do such a thing and for me, it’s hard; there is a piece missing at
home”.
mr. sanchez-neria’s half-brother, romano, writes
that mr. sanchez-neria takes time to support and take care of him whenever he
needs it – including helping him deal with bullying, helping with homework,
cooking, or just spending quality time together.
mr. sanchez-neria is committed to his
girlfriend, and wishes to build a family with her in the future. she writes
that mr. sanchez-neria is driven to achieve his goals, that he is supportive
and caring, and that he has a genuine soul and a golden heart.
mr. sanchez-neria remains involved in the
community through his participation in youth rugby.
amanda
neale-robinson
and
andrew
buchoon
write that mr. sanchez-neria was dedicated,
hard-working, respectful, polite, and a pleasure to work with. other members of
the community,
monica ramudo-palmeiro
and
alexis mcmillan
, describe him as polite, helpful, and responsible.
mr. sanchez-neria also has the support of his
best friend,
tristan plaz
, who shares his passion for music, life, and art. mr. plaz writes
that mr. sanchez-neria is outgoing, intelligent, and a really nice person who
listens and wants to help.
(v)      mr. sanchez-neria’s
conditions in pre-trial custody
mr. sanchez-neria filed an affidavit setting out
the conditions of his pre-trial custody at maplehurst correctional centre
(“mcc”). he kept contemporaneous records. those records describe the same state
of affairs described by in-custody accused persons on a daily basis in this
courthouse. where his records conflict with the information contained in the mcc
records, i accept mr. sanchez-neria’s account as more reliable. in particular:
•
lockdown.
o
mr. sanchez-neria has spent 373 days on
lockdown, with 230 full lockdown days and 143 partial lockdown days. he has
spent as much as nine straight days in lockdown.
o
most days, mr. sanchez-neria spent 20-24 hours a
day in his cell. yard access was rare. he went as long as six months without
fresh air.
•
hygiene.
o
access to shower program was unpredictable, especially but not
exclusively during lockdown.
o
when shower program was offered, mr. sanchez-neria had to choose
between a shower or a phone call, because time constraints did not permit both.
inmates fought over phone access constantly.
o
hygiene products were not available during lockdowns. he did not
regularly receive a change of clothes or a change of bedding. he went as long
as a month and a half without clean clothes. he went as long as four months
without clean sheets.
o
there were silverfish and cockroaches in the
cells.
•
triple-bunking.
o
mr. sanchez-neria was triple-bunked for most of
his time at mcc. he slept on a mattress on the floor. the cells are small. he
had to choose between putting his head near the toilet or underneath his
cellmate’s bunk. it was very cold and uncomfortable at night. bugs would crawl
on him at night.
•
physical and mental health.
o
in august 2024, october 2024, and february 2025,
mr. sanchez-neria was injured due to being triple-bunked. all three injuries
took place while he was trying to navigate around his cellmates at night to use
the washroom. all three injuries caused him significant pain. on two occasions,
he requested but did not receive medical attention. on one occasion, he was
taken to the hospital for an x-ray and given advil when the x-ray came back
normal.
o
in mid-january 2025, mr. sanchez-neria had a
severe eye infection for about two weeks. he requested but was not examined by
a medical professional. he was eventually given antibiotics.
o
mr. sanchez-neria’s mental health has
deteriorated during his time in custody, which has been dehumanizing. he feels
depressed and worthless:
▪
he has been distanced from his family. his
step-father has significant health issues that make him constantly anxious and
afraid to hear bad news.
▪
correctional staff searched their cells and
destroyed his personal belongings, including his family pictures.
▪
correctional staff subjected mr. sanchez-neria
to racially-motivated taunts. they mocked inmates for filing a complaint (“a
blue form”) about lockdown frequency. when mr. sanchez-neria told them to back
off, one of the correctional officers replied, “why don’t you write a blue form
you fat mexican fuck”. mr. sanchez-neria wrote down what happened and gathered
witnesses’ signatures. despite multiple requests, no sergeant has spoken to mr.
sanchez-neria about his complaint.
d.        the fit and appropriate
sentence
(i)         the fundamental purposes
and principles of sentencing
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
provides that proportionality is the fundamental principle of sentencing. mr. sanchez-neria’s
sentence must
be proportionate to the gravity of his offence and to his
degree of responsibility.
section 718
of the
criminal code
provides
that the fundamental purpose of mr. sanchez-neria’s sentence is to protect
society and to impose a just sanction that has one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce mr. sanchez-neria’s unlawful conduct and the harm that his conduct did to the
community;
(b) to deter mr. sanchez-neria and other persons from committing offences;
(c) to separate mr. sanchez-neria from society, if necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating mr. sanchez-neria;
(e) to provide reparations for the harm mr. sanchez-neria did to the community; and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility in mr. sanchez-neria, and acknowledge the harm he
did to the community.
section 718.2(d) provides that mr. sanchez-neria should not be deprived of
liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate, and s. 718.2(e)
requires me to consider all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that
are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to the
community.
section 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
requires
me to increase or reduce a sentence to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to mr. sanchez-neria or to his offences.
(ii)        aggravating
circumstances
there are a number of significant aggravating
circumstances.
first
, the
offence was planned and deliberate. this was a murder-for-hire. the details (
e.g.
,
target, location, window of opportunity, compensation) were discussed up front.
the offence was executed in accordance with the agreed-upon plan. mr.
sanchez-neria’s primary concerns, reflected in his messages and internet
searches following the offence, were that he would not be paid because mr.
hanjra did not die, and that he would be arrested. after the offence, mr.
sanchez-neria expressed the chilling sentiment that “it’s personal now next one
i won’t miss”.
second
, the
use of a firearm. crown counsel filed an affidavit setting out peel regional
police statistics concerning the prevalence of gun violence in this jurisdiction
as of january 10, 2025. the numbers are abysmal. since 2018, there have been
more than 100 shootings each year. in 2023, there were 115 shootings where 697
rounds were fired; 9 of 20 homicides were gunshot homicides. in 2024, there
were 168 shootings where 1249 rounds were fired; 13 of 20 homicides were
gunshot homicides.
third
,
the offence was carried out in
circumstances that posed great risk of injury to unrelated members of the
public. mr. sanchez-neria chose to fire multiple shots, in broad daylight on a
weekday morning, on a public roadway that was being actively used by others. the
reaction of the civilian witness who was driving in front of mr. hanjra
demonstrates that the risk was not limited to stray bullets, but extended to
the fearful reaction that the shooting would provoke in those nearby, and to
the behaviour of the impacted vehicles (
e.g.
, if mr. hanjra had lost
control of his vehicle).
fourth
, the
offence was carried out in circumstances that posed great risk of injury to mr.
hanjra’s 6-year-old daughter. mr. sanchez-neria knew she would be in the car. that
was a key part of the plan. she could have been injured by a stray bullet. and
if mr. hanjra had lost control of the vehicle, been incapacitated, or been
killed as mr. sanchez-neria intended, she would have been in the backseat of a
rudderless, running vehicle in a major brampton intersection.
fifth
,
the physical injury to the victim. mr. hanjra was struck four
times, with injuries to both arms. it was fortunate that mr. hanjra’s injuries
were not more severe.
sixth
, the
severe psychological impact on mr. hanjra and his family – in particular, his
daughter:
this event has
affected me and my family, specifically my daughter. this event changed our
life a lot my family lives in fear all the time, a balloon pop would scare us
all, my heart beats go wild hearing a pop sound. my daughter gets scared by
firework sound, balloon pop sound, tire burst or anything. going out of the
house we all keep looking at our surroundings if someone is following us, any
vehicle following us for longer would concern us. anyone looking at us from any
car scares us, my mom gets scared of anyone looking at us. … we are scared
always. …  my daughter and me are in trauma. from that day the rest of my
family is always scared of surroundings. …my daughter is fond of cars but will
say papa which ever car we buy next please make sure its bullet proof so that
we are all safe. this incident has effected us all mentally. ….this event took
our freedom.
(iii)      mitigating circumstances
there are also a number of meaningful mitigating
circumstances.
first
,
mr. sanchez-neria has no criminal
record.
second
,
mr. sanchez-neria is youthful. he
was only 21 years old at the time of the offence.
third
, mr.
sanchez-neria pleaded guilty, conserving judicial resources and court time. i
accept, based on his comments to the author of the pre-sentence report and his
allocution in court, that he has insight into the choices he made, that he is
taking accountability for his actions, and that he is genuinely remorseful.
his plea is entitled to significant weight.
fourth
,
mr. sanchez-neria’s personal circumstances attenuate his moral blameworthiness,
and provide context for the decisions he made that bring him before the court. those
decisions were made against the backdrop of an upbringing marred by community
violence, personal trauma, loss, and grief, in mexico and in canada.
there is a clear nexus between his experiences
and his history of substance use and mental health issues, culminating in
suicidal ideation and a dependence on fentanyl. however, the manner in which addictions
and mental health constrain individual choice and therefore impact individual
blameworthiness will vary from case to case. for example, there is no evidence
that mr. sanchez-neria needed to commit murder in order to access his drug of
choice. rather, mr. sanchez-neria agreed to commit murder as a commercial
venture. although i accept that his decision-making was affected by his addiction
and mental health challenges, the fact remains that he exercised a substantial
degree of volitional choice in accepting a murder-for-hire arrangement.
indeed, kp explicitly said that it was “all good” if
he did not want the job, and mr. sanchez-neria chose to accept that job
after
learning that the window of opportunity was when mr. hanjra left to “drop
his kid off” in the morning.
fifth
,
mr. sanchez-neria has strong rehabilitative
prospects. he has a solid support network – including his mother, his
step-father, his siblings, his girlfriend, and his friends. they will provide
stability and accountability as he moves forward from this matter. he is driven
to succeed. he has demonstrated leadership qualities and a willingness to give
back to his community. from may – october 2024, mr. sanchez-neria successfully
completed eight courses through new life ministries, including for addictions,
anger, and grief. from april – july 2024, mr. sanchez-neria successfully
completed 13 men’s educational sessions through the ministry of the solicitor general,
including for substance use, anger, and life strategies. in august 2024, mr.
sanchez-neria successfully completed the crossroads prison ministries “who are
you” course.  he has insight into his behaviour. his participation in
programming while in pre-trial custody shows his commitment to positive change.
sixth
, mr.
sanchez-neria experienced atrocious pre-trial conditions. as i wrote in
dooley
:
defence
counsel raised a sophisticated philosophical argument characterizing those
conditions as, in effect, a suspension of the rule of law. he is not wrong. the
state is demanding legal compliance from mr. dooley while flouting the basic
guidelines for the humane treatment of prisoners. this hypocrisy imperils
public confidence and challenges the state’s moral authority to inflict
deprivations of liberty as a legal consequence. what mr. dooley has suffered is
a disgrace to the administration of justice. the jurisprudence is clear that
this factor cannot justify the imposition of a sentence that is
disproportionate. i do, however, give this factor significant weight in
deciding the appropriate sentence.
the same reasoning applies to mr. sanchez-neria.
further, on february 27, 2025, my colleagues in this region were told to expect
a significant number of delays or refusals from mcc because a number of
wings/ranges had declared an outbreak of group a, streptococcus (gas)
overnight. upon being notified by defence counsel about additional public
health concerns witnessed and experienced by mr. sanchez-neria, crown counsel
made efforts to ascertain more information. she conveyed that mr. sanchez-neria
was housed in protective custody, but not in any of the wings with the
outbreak. he had not been identified as a close contact of a suspected or
actual case of gas. that outbreak has since been communicated to the judiciary
as an igas (invasive group a streptococcus) outbreak which, in its most severe
form, can cause death or serious illness. as of march 20, 2025, mcc had
confirmed two deaths to our regional senior justice.
defence counsel requested pre-sentence credit at
a ratio of 2:1.
crown counsel is strongly opposed.
her opposition is firmly grounded in the court of appeal jurisprudence
cautioning against treating the mitigating effect of harsh pre-trial conditions
“as a deduction from the appropriate sentence in the same way as the ‘summers’
credit’”, and expressing a strong preference for treating it as a mitigating
factor to be considered, although quantification was not necessarily
inappropriate.
as the court of appeal recently wrote in
brown
:
“
put simply,
judges must recognize that where an offender has already experienced
particularly punitive conditions during their pre-sentence custody, the
punishment they receive should be reduced to take this into account, but the
degree of mitigation is a matter of discretion in all the circumstances, and
not a matter of mathematical precision.
but defence counsel’s position also has jurisprudential
support, perhaps exemplified by molloy j.’s articulation of the quantification
approach in
shaikh
:
with the greatest of respect
for the guidance provided by the court of appeal for ontario
in
marshall
,
i
consider it preferable, not merely acceptable, to quantify the period of time
by which a sentence is reduced to reflect the harsh and punitive conditions of
pre-trial custody provided for
in
duncan
. i take no
issue with this being properly characterized as a mitigating factor, nor that
it should not be used so liberally as to make a sentence unfit. however, in my
opinion, the
duncan
credit
by its
nature, lends itself to being expressed numerically, which is not the case for
other kinds of mitigating factors, such as remorse, youth, and the like.
transparency and consistency
are two important underlying principles of sentencing that are best served by
specifying the amount of the
duncan
credit
. if a sentencing judge merely states
that the punitive pre-trial custody conditions have been factored in, without
specifying how, neither the accused, the public, the government, nor
correctional officials will know the extent to which this has been done. in the
result, there will be no public knowledge of the impact deplorable conditions
in the prisons are having on the sentences served by offenders, providing
little incentive to those in authority to fix the problem. while the amount
of
credit
to
be given is a matter of discretion to which deference would typically be
afforded, sentencing judges being transparent about the amount of the sentence
reduction given will also provide a better opportunity for appellate oversight
and error correction.
consistency in sentencing is
enhanced in two ways by specifying the amount of the
duncan
credit
. first, individual sentencing judges
will have a better sense of the extent to which other judges are taking
the
duncan
credit
into account.
…
second, if the sentence that
would have been imposed without the
duncan
credit
is clearly stated, this will
assist in determining consistency in sentencing for any given offence.
otherwise, sentences for particular offences may seem completely out of
proportion to other sentences, a difference which might be fully explainable by
the difference in the circumstances of pre-trial incarceration.
i do not consider it advisable or necessary to
weigh in on this debate. my views about the proper analytical approach will not
change the reality that i am bound by appellate jurisprudence that recently and
unambiguously favours not quantifying the mitigating effect of particularly
punitive pre-trial incarceration conditions. further, as defence counsel
submits, that debate is largely academic from mr. sanchez-neria’s perspective,
whose primary concern is the mitigating weight afforded to what he has suffered
while in pre-trial custody. i give this mitigating factor substantial weight.
(iv)      collateral consequences
the law gives trial judges “sufficient manoeuvrability to
tailor sentences to the circumstances of the particular offence and the
particular offender”.
in
suter
, the supreme court affirmed that examining collateral
consequences “enables a sentencing judge to craft a proportionate sentence in a
given case by taking into account
all
the relevant
circumstances related to the offence and the offender”.
there is no rigid formula. a collateral consequence “includes any consequence
arising from the commission of an offence, the conviction for an offence, or
the sentence imposed for an offence, that impacts the offender.”
however, collateral consequences “cannot be used to reduce a sentence to a
point where the sentence becomes disproportionate to the gravity of the offence
or the moral blameworthiness of the offender.” the fundamental principle of
proportionality must prevail in every case.
mr. sanchez-neria has no status in canada. he will likely be
deported upon the completion of any fit sentence. he will likely be barred from
canada for life unless he applied for and received authorization to return. this
collateral consequence is relevant in tailoring the sentence and carries some
weight in mr. sanchez-neria’s case. he has many loved ones in canada. i am
mindful, however, that the collateral consequences flowing from the statutory scheme
are an expression of parliament’s will.
(v)      the fit and appropriate
sentence
mr. sanchez-neria attempted to murder mr.
hanraj. that conduct comes with a heightened degree of moral culpability. as
the court of appeal wrote in
mcarthur
, “the moral culpability of the
attempted murderer is at least equal to that of a murderer.  he or she avoids a
murder conviction and the automatic sentence of life imprisonment not because
of any mitigating factor, but because through good fortune, the victim was not
killed.”
the primary sentencing objectives are deterrence and denunciation.
double digit prison sentences have been imposed
in cases of planned executions using firearms.
in
small
, schreck j. reviewed the range of sentences imposed for
attempted murder:
in
forcillo
,
at para. 131, the ontario court of appeal affirmed the sentencing range for
attempted murder of six years to life imprisonment that had been set in
r.
v. tan
,
2008 onca 574
, 268 o.a.c. 385, at para.
35
.  that
range can be broken down into three subcategories:
•
in rare cases, single-digit sentences, such as the six-year
sentence imposed in the unusual circumstances in
forcillo,
where
a police officer attempted to kill an individual after justifiably shooting him
in the execution of his duties…;
•
sentences of 10 to 16 years in cases involving the use of a
firearm in a public place, “planned executions” and domestic situations:
…
;
•
higher sentence of up to life imprisonment in cases of “stark
horror,” very serious and permanent injuries to the victim, or a lengthy
criminal record; ….
section 718.2
(b) of the
criminal code
sets out the principle of parity. mr. sanchez-neria’s sentence should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances. crown counsel and defence counsel both
provided a number of cases supporting their position, as well as helpful
sentencing charts summarizing the salient cases. although each case is captive
to its own facts, these sentencing precedents reflect “the range of
factual situations in the world and the plurality of judicial perspectives. …
they are the practical expression of both parity and proportionality.”
i have reviewed these cases in situating mr. sanchez-neria
among the spectrum of conduct and offenders reflected in the jurisprudence. i
will not summarize them all, but by way of example:
•
in
r. v. guedez-infante
,
a young man with no criminal
record left the bar, returned, and then shot the victim, leaving them severely
and permanently disabled. the physical consequences of mr. sanchez-neria’s
offence were less serious, but had other additional aggravating features (
e.g.
,
the presence of a child, the degree of planning). mr. sanchez-neria’s
mitigating circumstances are substantially more compelling than for mr.
guedez-infante (
e.g.
, guilty plea, harsh pre-trial incarceration
conditions, attenuated moral blameworthiness). mr. guedez-infante received a
sentence of 10 years.
•
in
r. v. hernandez-viera
,
a young man with a related and
serious criminal record shot a former friend in an underground parking lot for
unclear reasons, leaving her with permanent nerve damage. the physical consequences
of mr. sanchez-neria’s offence were less serious, but had additional
aggravating features (
e.g.
, the presence of a child, the degree of
planning, the degree of risk to unrelated parties). like mr. sanchez-neria, mr.
hernandez-viera had mitigating factors that attenuated his moral
blameworthiness. however, mr. sanchez-neria has compelling mitigating
circumstances that mr. hernandez-veria did not (
e.g.
, guilty plea, no
criminal record, positive strong prospects). mr. hernandez-veria received a
sentence of 10 years, five months and 1 week.
•
in
r. v. ljeskovica
,
a 29-year-old first offender
left the victim’s home, returned, and then stabbed the victim multiple times,
including twice in the chest. the victim nearly died. the physical consequences
of mr. sanchez-neria’s offence were less serious, but had additional
aggravating features (
e.g.
, the presence of a child, the sophistication
of the planning, the use of a firearm, the degree of risk to unrelated
parties). like mr. sanchez-neria, mr. ljeskovica pleaded guilty, was genuinely
remorseful, and had strong rehabilitative prospects. mr. sanchez-neria has significant
mitigating factors that mr. ljeskovica did not (
e.g.
, attenuated moral
blameworthiness, harsh pre-trial incarceration conditions). mr. ljeskovica received
a sentence of 8 years.
in the absence of the mitigating factors, and
most significantly his guilty plea, his attenuated blameworthiness, his strong
rehabilitative prospects, and the atrocious pre-trial incarceration conditions,
i would have situated mr. sanchez-neria’s case at the low end of the second
subcategory identified in
small
. in all the circumstances, and
considering the sentencing precedents, i find that a sentence of 8.5 years
would give proper weight to the aggravating and mitigating features of this
case, and would be proportionate to the gravity of mr. sanchez-neria’s offence
and his moral blameworthiness.
mr. sanchez-neria, you are here because you
chose to accept money in exchange for killing mr. hanraj, and because you fired
four rounds at him intending to accomplish just that. it may not feel that way
today, but you are lucky that you failed. if you had succeeded, a superior
court judge would be sentencing you to a life sentence, and you would probably
not be eligible for parole until you were well into your 40s. what a tragedy that
would have been for mr. hanraj and his family, and what a waste that would have
been of your potential. you have seen and experienced more trauma than anyone
should. but you also have a lot going for you that not everyone does. every time
i see you in court, your family and friends are here to show you love and
support. they wrote me sincere letters about the kind of person they know you
are. the person they know is not a person who would literally kill for money.
and yet, here we are. you told me in court last time that you can’t believe how
close you came to taking a life, that you were sorry to let your friends and
family down, that you want to prove you are not a cold-hearted monster. i know
you are not a monster. i know you are sorry. i know you can tell right from
wrong. your sister writes that you have spent your life keeping her away from
the wrong path, and your mother writes that you spent much of your life on the
right path. they are among the people who are offering to help you. hard as it
may be, you must learn to accept that help if you want anything to change. you
will still be a young man when you are released. you control your choices and
your path after that. i believe you have the ability to build a life you and
your family can be proud of, if that is what you choose. i wish you good luck.
the warrant of committal should read as follows.
on the sole count of attempted murder, the sentence would have been 3,102 days.
mr. sanchez-neria has served 470 real days, for which i will credit him with
705 days (at 1.5:1). this leaves mr. sanchez-neria with 2,397 days left to
serve.
f.         ancillary orders
there will be a dna order pursuant to
s.
487.051(2)
of the
criminal code
. there will be a weapons prohibition for
life pursuant to
s. 109(2)
of the
criminal code
. there will be an order
pursuant to
s. 743.21(1)
of the
criminal code
prohibiting mr.
sanchez-neria from communicating, directly or indirectly, with harpreet hanjra or
members of his immediate family during the custodial portion of his sentence. i
waive the victim fine surcharge.
i thank both counsel for their excellent
assistance.
released:  march 28, 2025
justice
mabel cheuk ting lai
this is not a mitigating factor. it is merely the
absence of an aggravating factor
.
r. v. dooley
(6 march 2025), brampton 23-1871 (ont.
c.j.);
see also
r. v. crawford
,
2025 onsc 345
, at paras.
182-186
.
r. v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344
, explaining
r.
v. duncan
,
2016 onca 754
, at paras.
51-53
;
see also
r. v. smith
,
2023 onca 500
, at para.
37
. indeed, in varying the sentence
imposed in
r. v.
williams
,
2024 onca 508
, at para.
29
, the panel explicitly quantifies the
deduction attributable to the particularly harsh pre-trial conditions.
r. v. brown
,
2025 onca 47
, at paras.
3-4
.
r. v. shaikh and tanoli
,
2024 onsc 774
, at
paras.
22-25
.
r. v. ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
, at para.
38
.
r. v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
, at para.
46
.
suter
,
supra
, at para.
47
.
suter
,
supra
, at para.
56
;
r. v.
pham
,
2013 scc 15
, at paras.
14-16
.
pham
,
supra
, at paras.
13-16
.
r. v. mcarthur
(2004),
2004 canlii 8759 (on ca)
,
182 c.c.c. (3d) 230
(ont. c.a.)
, at para.
47
.
r. v. mohamed
,
2014 onca 814
, at para.
5
.
r. v. chevers
,
2011 onca 569
, at para.
8
,
citing
r. v. tan
,
2008 onca 574
.
r. v. small
,
2023 onsc 6841
, at para.
40
[citations omitted.]
r.
v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at
para.
33
.
r. v. guedez-infante
,
2009 onca 739
(10
years).
r. v. hernandez-viera
,
2022 onsc 3776
(125.25
months, less
summers
credit).
r. v. ljeskovica
,
2008 canlii 63569 (on sc)
,
o.j. no. 4935 (s.c.)
,
per
trotter j. (as he then was) (8 years, less pre-trial credit).