ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. anderson
, 2025 oncj 407
date:
2025 07 31
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 23 47107233
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
leo anderson
reasons
for sentence
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on july 17 and 31, 2025
reasons
released on july 31, 2025
claire sweeny & raymond
woloshyn-chick.............................. counsel for the crown
alexandra valeri........................................................................... counsel
for mr. anderson
garg j.:
overview
mr. leo anderson is a young black man. he has
faced overt and systemic racism in his life. this social context provides some
explanation for mr. anderson’s poor decision-making. the sentencing process
must acknowledge and squarely address the realities of mr. anderson’s life to
achieve the goal of equal justice for all.
mr. anderson also exercised his free will to commit
a dangerous crime. mr. anderson decided to attend a hamilton pub while equipped
with a loaded handgun. he ignored two court orders that prohibited him from
possessing firearms. the pub is a well-known restaurant
and live music venue in hamilton’s corktown neighbourhood. it is centrally located on a park near residences. mr. anderson consumed too much alcohol and was escorted outside. but
he refused to take his night elsewhere. he continued to engage in a
back-and-forth verbal altercation with the bouncer. during the confrontation,
mr. anderson repeatedly reached into his satchel. this satchel contained the
handgun. when the confrontation turned physical, the handgun—loaded with five live
rounds and two spent casings—fell from the satchel and landed on the ground.
i must impose a sentence that is proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and mr. anderson’s moral culpability. mr.
anderson’s life experiences—including the disadvantages flowing from personal
and systemic anti-black racism—explain to some degree his decision to commit
this crime. nevertheless, based on the aggravated facts of this offence and mr.
anderson’s criminal history, i conclude that rehabilitative goals are subordinate
to denouncing the crime, deterring the conduct, and protecting the public. the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to impose a just sanction that protects
society, contributes to respect for the law, and helps maintain collective
well-being.
for the reasons that follow, i conclude that a global
custodial term of four years, five months, and eight days is the least
intrusive and the lowest quantum that fulfills the overall purpose of
proportionality. this sentence permits the imposition of a probation order
following a further custodial term of two years less one day, after credit is
applied for pre-sentence custody.
positions of the parties
the crown seeks a global custodial sentence of
four and a half years: four years for possessing a loaded firearm without
authorization, six months concurrent for the breaches of a release order and a
probation order, and six months consecutive for the breach of a weapons
prohibition. the defence seeks a global custodial sentence between two and two-and-a-half
years. the defence did not oppose the ancillary orders sought by the crown.
neither party submitted on the suitability of probation.
aggravating factors
the aggravating features of this case relate to
the circumstances of the offence and mr. anderson’s criminal history.
circumstances of the offence
there are multiple facts that demonstrate the highly
aggravating circumstances of the offence.
first, mr. anderson chose to possess a loaded handgun
in a public place, specifically a .22 calibre
restricted firearm loaded with five rounds of .22 calibre ammunition and two
spent casings. the decision to bring a gun into a public
setting created unnecessary danger for everyone present: see
r. v. samaniego
,
2020 onca 439
at para.
54
. the trial evidence established that the pub was busy
that night. people deserve to feel safe when they spend their saturday night enjoying
live music at a local haunt.
second, mr. anderson possessed the loaded handgun
while significantly intoxicated. he had trouble controlling himself inside the
pub, which led to him being kicked out. it is common knowledge that people are
prone to making poor decisions when intoxicated. bravado and belligerence tend to
replace sound judgment, as evidenced by mr. anderson’s actions that night. the
risk to public safety is enhanced when the intoxicated person is armed with a
loaded handgun.
third, mr. anderson was confrontational and
persistently aggressive that night. he ignored the bouncer’s direction to leave
the area. he tried to re-enter the pub. the verbal altercation turned to blows.
mr. anderson’s subsequent efforts to retrieve the gun led to another
confrontation where the bouncer chased mr. anderson
across the road. having acquitted mr. anderson of assault,
i must ensure that i do not allow unproven assaultive conduct to seep into my
analysis as an aggravating fact. but acquitting mr. anderson of assault does not
render the context irrelevant. i acquitted mr. anderson of that charge because
i doubted whether he knew that the bouncer was not consenting to force. it nonetheless
remains aggravating to engage in a consensual fight while possessing a loaded handgun
because of the risks to public safety. the fight increased the chances of the handgun
discharging, even accidentally.
fourth, mr. anderson made dangerous gestures
towards the readily accessible handgun. mr. anderson was wearing a satchel with
the compartment at his front lower torso. the
compartment contained the gun. the compartment was open, and mr. anderson kept handling
it during his confrontation with the bouncer. the video surveillance around
11:00:55 shows mr. anderson putting his hand inside the compartment, and the
same can be seen when he re-approached the bouncer around 11:01:41.
the bouncer saw mr. anderson
posturing with the satchel and grabbing something inside the compartment.
this still from 11:00:57 depicts mr. anderson in
the middle of the frame wearing a toque. he is rushing at the bouncer with his
right hand reaching towards the loaded handgun:
mr. anderson is not being sentenced for what
might have happened. he is not responsible for consequences that did not
unfold. he is, however, being sentenced for his conduct that night, which is
relevant to his moral culpability and the risk that he posed to others. his
actions in reaching towards the loaded gun and manipulating the compartment that
carried the gun increase the gravity of the offence relative to other firearm possession
offences: see
r. v. m.v.
,
2023 onca 724
at para.
46
.
fifth, the gun fell to the ground during the
physical altercation and remained there for several minutes. even though mr.
anderson did not intentionally dispose of the gun in a public place, it remains
aggravating that his actions had this effect—a loaded handgun was available to several
unknown people. it is fortunate that good samaritans
prevented mr. anderson or malicious actors from retrieving the firearm and stored
it safely until the police arrived.
sixth, mr. anderson blatantly breached multiple
court orders. his release order imposed a curfew and prohibited the possession
of weapons. his probation order required him to keep the peace and be of good
behaviour. i only use as aggravating the breaches that will receive concurrent
sentences.
the breaches demonstrate the failed efforts to curb mr. anderson’s risk through
community supervision.
criminal history
mr. anderson has a lengthy criminal record. while
he lacks prior convictions for weapons offences, he does have eight prior
convictions or findings of guilt for violent offences like assault, robbery,
and uttering threats.
the record is an aggravating factor. it renders
a stiffer sentence appropriate because it rebuts a suggestion that mr. anderson
is of good character. it also increases the need for specific deterrence and
suggests a greater likelihood of recidivism:
r. v. taylor
,
2004
canlii 7199 (on ca)
at para.
39
.
mitigating factors and collateral consequences
mr. anderson’s personal circumstances
section
718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
has become the cornerstone for
incorporating social context evidence into the sentencing process to ensure
that the ultimate sentence reflects an offender’s individual circumstances,
including their experiences of systemic discrimination and historical
injustices.
an enhanced pre-sentence report provided extensive
information about mr. anderson’s background and experiences with anti-black
racism. the report was helpful and compelling. it outlines the overt and
systemic racism that mr. anderson has endured in his life. it outlines his educational,
economic, and social disadvantages that played a role in him committing the
offences before the court. at this stage in my reasons, i will focus on how mr.
anderson’s life experiences erected barriers to him forging a positive and
prosocial identity.
mr. anderson’s struggles with his identity might
have started when he had difficulty finding his place as a boy growing up in jamaica.
he expressed how boys were expected to “grow up fast, be a bad man, and love
girls”. but at the age of seven, mr. anderson was exploring his sexuality with
older boys. he was fearful of not being accepted by his family. he felt that he
needed to “act a certain type of way” to conceal a part of his identity that
would not be accepted by loved ones. his mother continues to struggle with his
lifestyle choices and identity as a gay man.
the identity struggles continued when mr.
anderson immigrated to canada. his family initially settled in lynedoch,
ontario. they were the only black people who resided in the village. they felt isolated
and unaccepted.
forging a strong identity is difficult in the
absence of positive role models. mr. anderson reported that his stepfather, who
was white, indulged in alcohol, drugs, and racist jokes, which escalated the
conflict in the home. mr. anderson eventually stopped seeing his stepfather as
a father figure. mr. anderson believes that navigating life was difficult in
the absence of black male role models.
through his upbringing, mr. anderson came to
believe that “there was nothing good about being black”. mr. anderson was the subject of racist
jokes and epithets from older children. he envied a biracial friend for his
lighter skin complexion and physical characteristics that apparently saved him
from ridicule. when mr. anderson struggled to fit in through healthy means, he gravitated
toward drugs and alcohol as misguided pathways to social connection and
belonging.
the education system did not help mr. anderson
develop a positive identity. his school registered him in english as a second
language despite english being his native language. mr. anderson reported that
this experience made him feel “stupid” because his fellow students made fun of him.
finally, few aspects of a person’s identity are
more fundamental or enduring than their name. mr. anderson’s first name is leo.
yet, around grade six, a teacher named him leonard. imposing a different first
name on mr. anderson, seemingly rooted in racist motivations, contributed to
the erasure of his identity. the school refused to use mr. anderson’s real first
name despite his mother’s efforts. when the police attended the school in grade eight,
the teacher identified him as leonard. this incorrect first name has followed mr.
anderson ever since.
the misnaming continued into this trial. the
information showed mr. anderson’s first name as leonard. misnaming mr.
anderson, even unintentionally, extended his experience of racism. the criminal
justice system must do its part to confront, mitigate, and erase racism. i hope
that amending mr. anderson’s name on the information and using the correct name
in these reasons will help ensure that the system calls him leo anderson going
forward.
harsh conditions
in pre-sentence custody
mr. anderson has spent significant time in
pre-sentence custody at the hamilton-wentworth detention centre. i accept that the
conditions were harsh due to triple-bunking and restrictions on liberty. for
example, the institutional records show that mr. anderson was triple bunked for
73 days from december 16, 2023, to october 31, 2024, meaning that three inmates
were housed in the cell roughly 23% of the time.
the records also show days when mr. anderson had the cell to himself. while
institutional records were not filed for dates past october 31, 2024, the
parties were content that i take notice that triple bunking generally continued,
without specifics on the rate. furthermore, the institutional records and mr.
anderson’s journal show that he faced liberty restrictions through partial lock
downs
and lock downs starting at 6pm. there have also been some full lock downs. in
assessing the harshness of the conditions, i do not rely on mr. anderson’s
assertion that he was strip searched. i do not have reliable evidence on the
circumstances of the search and what prompted it.
mr. anderson’s time in pre-sentence custody is a
mitigating circumstance or a collateral consequence that is relevant to
fashioning an appropriate sentence. the over-housing and liberty restrictions have
negatively impacted mr. anderson’s mental health. he described the experience
as “draining” and difficult due to the lack of privacy and inability to move about.
the lock downs have prevented inmates from blowing off steam, which can
contribute to violent eruptions.
i decline to give mr. anderson a sentence
reduction in the form of numerical credit: see
r. v. marshall
,
2021
onca 344
at paras.
50-53
. rather, “particularly punitive pretrial incarceration
conditions can be a mitigating factor to be taken into account with the other
mitigating and aggravating factors in arriving at the appropriate sentence”:
marshall
at para.
52
.
immigration consequences
mr. anderson is a permanent resident. he faces
the risk of deportation on account of his criminal history and the offences
before the court. no one suggests that i fashion a sentence to attenuate the
risk of the immigration consequences. but i accept that the sentence will necessarily
have a greater impact on mr. anderson because of his circumstances than it
would for a canadian citizen: see
r. v. suter
,
2018 scc 34
at para.
48
.
family separation
consequences
i must consider family separation consequences
when evaluating the length of the custodial term:
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca
830
at paras.
44-45
. mr. anderson has a son who is approaching his tenth
birthday.
extending mr. anderson’s time in custody could have negative ramifications for
his son. just as mr. anderson grew up without positive male role models, his
absence threatens to write a similar chapter in his son’s life. the cycle of
unmet guidance could renew. courts try to minimize the impact of sentencing on
an offender’s family because “interfering with this foundational social
institution … can endanger community safety and society’s well-being”:
habib
at para.
46
.
nevertheless, i conclude that family separation
considerations will minimally impact the sentence that i impose. mr. anderson
describes his son as his “saving grace” and a source of motivation. while that
might reflect mr. anderson’s personal sentiment, i am not satisfied that mr.
anderson’s absence while incarcerated will pose a palpable problem for his son,
particularly given the lack of evidence that i accept of mr. anderson being a
consistent or constructive presence in his son’s life while in the community: see
habib
at para.
43
.
nor is there evidence showing that the son has suffered hardship during mr.
anderson’s current period of incarceration.
proportionality analysis
the fundamental principle of sentencing is found
in
s. 718.1
of the
criminal code
. i must produce a sentence that is
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and mr. anderson’s degree of
responsibility:
r. v. morris
,
2021 onca 680
at para.
61
.
“proportionality is the
sine qua non
of a just sanction”:
r. v.
ipeelee
,
2012 scc 13
at para.
37
.
gravity of the offence
the possession of a loaded and concealed handgun
in public is a grave offence with a heightened degree of normative
wrongfulness. the crime puts the public in real and immediate danger. “a person
who carries a concealed, loaded handgun in public undermines the community’s
sense of safety and security. carrying a concealed, loaded handgun in a public
place in canada is antithetical to the canadian concept of a free and ordered
society”:
morris
at para.
68
; see also
r. v.
ferrigon
,
2007 canlii 16828 (on sc)
, o.j. no. 1883 (sup. ct.) at
para.
25
.
parliament has indicated that the courts should
re-calibrate their view on the objective gravity of the offence. on december
15, 2023, parliament increased the maximum sentence for the possession offence
under s. 95 from 10 years to 14 years. increases to the maximum indicate
parliament’s determination that the offence be treated as more grave than before:
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
at paras.
96-100
.
the aggravating factors cited above render this
offence even more serious than other already grave instances of possessing a
firearm in public. mr. anderson was confronting and fighting a bouncer while
intoxicated and repeatedly reaching towards the loaded firearm in his satchel. his
actions fall at the “true crime” end of the spectrum of gun possession: see
morris
at paras.
20, 151, 162
.
mr. anderson’s degree of responsibility
systemic and background factors,
including those attributable to anti-black racism, are relevant when sentencing
mr. anderson. those factors help to explain his commission of the crime: see
r.
v. hamilton
,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca)
at para.
135
.
evidence that mr. anderson’s choices were
limited or influenced by his disadvantaged circumstances speaks to his moral
responsibility:
morris
at para.
76
. a direct causal link to the offences
is not needed for mr. anderson’s background to mitigate his personal
responsibility: para. 96. “there must, however, be some connection between the
overt and systemic racism identified in the community and the circumstances or
events that are said to explain or mitigate the criminal conduct in issue.
racism may have impacted on the offender in a way that bears on the offender’s
moral culpability for the crime, or it may be relevant in some other way to a
determination of the appropriate sentence”: para. 97.
the connection in this case is not obvious or
direct. but the connection is present. i found persuasive defence counsel’s
explanation of how mr. anderson’s background played some role in the offences
before the court. the enhanced pre-sentence report reveals that a script was
being written for mr. anderson—crafted not by him, but by the systems and
individuals surrounding him. this script cast him in a role shaped by exclusion
and instability, setting the stage for antisocial outcomes. in many ways, mr.
anderson lived out the script handed to him, rather than one he authored
himself.
a straight line cannot be drawn from mr.
anderson’s background to his decision to arm himself with a loaded handgun. but
mr. anderson’s experiences nevertheless bear on his moral culpability because
they help explain his overall poor decision making and non-adherence to social
norms. i detailed earlier the systemic and overt erasure of mr. anderson’s
identity over the years. his experiences of being bullied, harassed, and
targeted because of his skin colour compromised his mental health and pushed
him towards substance abuse. without positive black male role models in his
life, mr. anderson lacked the support he needed to withstand assaults on his
sense of self-worth and the “othering” he encountered. mr. anderson’s limited
educational achievements, which likely resulted from his poor experiences in
the education system,
contributed to his economic and social disadvantages. mr. anderson’s
confrontation with the bouncer, which aggravated the offence, might have demonstrated
his learned response to unfair treatment by people in authority. while there is
no basis to find misconduct by the bouncer, mr. anderson might nonetheless have
perceived unfairness. after all, “anti-black racism can have a profound and
insidious impact on those who must endure it on a daily basis”:
morris
at para.
1
. in short, mr. anderson’s moral
blameworthiness is mitigated to some extent by his mental health vulnerabilities,
substance abuse, and educational and economic disadvantages: see
morris
at
para.
179
.
blending the
duality of proportionality
gun crime plagues the city of hamilton. as a
member of this community, i am attuned to both the local realities and the
public’s growing concern: see
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
at para.
48
.
the persistent presence of firearms and related offences has heightened public
fear. the statistics filed by the crown confirm that this fear is grounded in
the lived experience of this community.
the frequency of gun crime is not an aggravating
factor. however, it does raise the need for denunciation and general
deterrence:
lacasse
at para.
90
;
r. v. lanktree
,
2024 onca 506
at
para.
12
. i find it imperative that this court convey to the community that the
illegal possession of firearms will not be tolerated—especially in public
spaces; see also
r. v. beauparlant
,
2024 onsc 1655
at para.
73
.
mr. anderson has faced disadvantage, much of it imposed
through systemic factors beyond his control. people who face such disadvantage find
themselves behind the eight-ball, struggling to keep pace with peers who
enjoyed a more privileged upbringing. still, to completely discount mr.
anderson’s moral blameworthiness on account of that disadvantage would overlook
his moral agency and free will. while people in mr. anderson’s position might
be prone to involvement in the criminal justice system, these offences well exceeded
mere involvement in crime. mr. anderson made a deliberate decision to arm
himself with a loaded, concealed handgun: see
morris
at paras.
101, 153
.
there is no suggestion that this decision was driven by coercion or negative peer
influence. though still a young man, he was nearly 30 years old at the time of
the offence. i would not characterize his actions as youthful indiscretion. there
was no good reason—real or perceived—for him to possess a loaded firearm in
public that night. he enjoyed no inherent right to be in the pub, and in fact his
release order prohibited him from being there altogether at that time.
there are also factors that elevate mr.
anderson’s moral culpability and degree of responsibility. i have already
highlighted mr. anderson’s repeated decisions that increased his risk to public
safety. his possession of the handgun was not momentary; the only reasonable
conclusion is that he possessed it throughout his time in the pub and during his
persistent confrontations with the bouncer.
furthermore, mr. anderson has a significant
criminal record. while his longest custodial term so far was for six months
less a day, the nature of the offending demonstrates his enduring risk to
public safety. mr. anderson has received sentences that included community
supervision, which is geared toward an offender’s rehabilitation and
reintegration into society. those sentences have been ineffective at curbing
mr. anderson’s criminogenic behaviour. his continued offending increases his
moral blameworthiness:
r. v. gilmore
,
2025 onca 517
at para.
40
. “an extensive criminal record suggests that an individual is more
morally blameworthy because they have previously been sanctioned yet remain
undeterred and unwilling or unable to rehabilitate”: para. 44.
during his allocution, mr. anderson recognized
that actions speak louder than words and talked about laying a groundwork for
those actions. i took mr. anderson to likely be referring to the medication
that he has been taking and the programming that he completed in jail.
i commend mr. anderson for trying
to put himself in a better position to succeed upon his eventual release. but i
am not satisfied that mr. anderson has insight into his offending behaviour. he
does not take accountability for the offence. he does not show remorse. none of
these points are aggravating. mr. anderson is entitled to maintain his
innocence. but the absence of insight, accountability, and remorse dampens his prospects
of rehabilitation: see
r. v. thompson
,
2025 onca 254
at para.
11
;
morris
at para.
159
.
the failure to take responsibility for criminal conduct can render a lenient
sentence inappropriate:
morris
at para.
160
. by contrast, mr. anderson’s
history and escalating conduct make specific deterrence a pressing concern.
the law permits me to impose a sentence that
gives less weight to specific deterrence and greater weight to mr. anderson’s
rehabilitation:
morris
at paras.
79, 81
. however, in all the
circumstances, i choose to prioritize specific deterrence, general deterrence,
and denunciation, without losing sight of mr. anderson’s rehabilitative
potential. while the social context evidence diminishes mr. anderson’s moral
blameworthiness, it does not do so significantly; see
e.g.
,
r. v.
lowe
,
2025 onca 475
at paras.
12-14
. and as o’marra j. held in
r. v.
husbands
,
2019 onsc 6824
at para.
135
, aff’d
2024 onca 115
at para.
77
: “there must be a significant aspect of deterrence to
those who would carry concealed handguns in any public place whatever the
circumstances in which they came to possess and carry the gun. the potential
for death, severe injury and mayhem is self-evident”. proportionality guards
against excessive punishment driven by denunciation or deterrence, but it does
not displace the need to protect the public:
gilmore
at para.
36
;
r. v.
k.r.j.
,
2016 scc 31
at para.
33
.
quantum analysis
i must remember the purpose of sentencing, honour
the fundamental principle of proportionality, apply the sentencing principles, and
balance the aggravating, mitigating, and collateral factors. this complete analysis
leads me to conclude that the crown’s proposed global sentence of
four-and-a-half years is fit and appropriate. the offence for possessing a
loaded handgun merits a four-year term. the breach of the weapons prohibition
order merits a six-month consecutive term.
i start with the sentencing range identified in
morris
.
while the court ultimately imposed a sentence of two years less one day, the
court also recognized that the trial judge could have reasonably imposed a
penitentiary sentence of three years. mr. anderson deserves a harsher sentence
by every metric. mr. morris was a first offender; mr. anderson has a prior
youth and criminal record with over 30 entries. mr. morris was not encumbered
by court orders; mr. anderson was breaching probation and release orders. mr.
morris was almost 23 at the time of the offences; mr. anderson was almost 30.
the factual circumstances of mr. anderson’s crimes, in my assessment, are also more
aggravating than those in the case of mr. morris.
both parties agree that the most persuasive
cases in the jurisprudence would be those that applied the ontario court of
appeal’s seminal decision in
morris
and were rendered after parliament
increased the maximum sentence for the s. 95 offence. i agree, although cases
that do not meet those two criteria remain helpful (and sometimes binding, as with
the
morris
decision).
the cases provided by the crown support the
imposition of a four-year sentence for the s. 95 offence.
r. v. nur
,
2013 onca 677
, aff’d
2015 scc 15
involved a 19-year-old first offender born in
somalia who brought a loaded, prohibited firearm to a community centre and threw
it under a car while running from the police. the offender and his family were
found to be convention refugees. both appellate courts upheld the sentence of
three years and four months (40 months of pre-sentence custody).
writing for the court of
appeal, doherty j.a. held that offenders like mr. anderson who engage in truly
criminal conduct should receive exemplary sentences that emphasize deterrence
and denunciation, even absent a statutory minimum: para. 206; see also
r. v.
francis
,
2025 oncj 21
at para.
53
.
other relevant cases include the following:
•
r. v. mahamet-zene
,
2018 onsc 1050
: the sentencing judge imposed 42 months on the s.
95 offence (less credit for harsh bail conditions). the offender was 24 years
old and had no prior criminal record. he was born in chad and immigrated to
canada with his family at a young age. the judge found the offender to have
generally favourable prospects for rehabilitation but also found there to be
serious aggravating factors.
•
r. v. blagrove-robinson
(12 july 2022), cr-21-40000482-0000 (ont. sup. ct.), unreported:
the sentencing judge imposed
a global five-year sentence for the possession of a loaded handgun, the breach
of a weapons prohibition order, and two breaches of a release order. the
offender pleaded guilty. he was 22 years old at the time of sentencing. the
judge found that he had a difficult background and showed good prospects of
rehabilitation.
the defence highlighted two cases where the
sentencing judges applied
morris
and allowed the offenders to
serve reformatory-length sentences in the community through a conditional
sentence order. these cases are distinguishable:
•
r. v. francis
,
2025 oncj 21
: the facts in
francis
were far less egregious. the offender
was compliant with the authorities and did not elevate the danger through his
actions, beyond the inherent danger of possessing a loaded handgun. the
sentencing judge found that he decided to arm himself because of his own
victimization at the hands of gun violence. he had no prior criminal record.
his success on bail for 44 months made the judge “very optimistic” about his
potential for rehabilitation. the offender expressed remorse for his actions
and recognized that he had made “stupid” and “senseless” choices.
•
r. v. vanderhyden-steaman
,
2025 oncj 22
: this case involved numerous mitigating factors not
present before me. the offender pleaded guilty and indicated his intention to
plead guilty at an early stage. he was 24 years old at the time of the offence.
he had no prior criminal record. he had a solid employment history and was
currently employed. the sentencing judge recognized the offender’s
“industriousness”, “growing maturity”, and strong rehabilitative potential.
turning to the breach of a weapons prohibition
order, it is common for an offender to receive a one-year consecutive sentence.
imposing a six-month term gives effect to the principles of restraint and
totality. a consecutive sentence is appropriate since the breach constitutes a
distinct invasion of a protected societal interest:
r. v. claros
,
2019
onca 626
at para.
51
. the breaches of the release and probation orders could
have also attracted consecutive sentences, but i will defer to the crown’s
request for concurrent terms: see
r. v. wisdom
,
2024 onsc 4047
at para.
36
.
in sum, i am satisfied that a global sentence of
four years and six months is appropriate for mr. anderson. however, i choose to
slightly reduce the global sentence to four years, five
months, and eight days. this sentence allows me to impose a further reformatory
term that is followed by probation. probation provides
for an extended period of supervision and access to culturally sensitive
counselling. the restraint principle favours this approach:
morris
at para.
182
. as the court explained at para. 130:
… if the sentencing judge determines that
the range of sentence for the particular offence and offender includes a
two-year sentence and that probation would assist the offender’s
rehabilitation, the restraint principle favours imposing a sentence of no more
than two years, even if a somewhat longer period of incarceration would also
fall within the appropriate range.
i recognize that the sentence will be
significantly longer than any of mr. anderson’s prior custodial terms. but the
nature of mr. anderson’s criminal record, when compared to the present
offences, establishes that the step or jump principle does not apply. this
conclusion is implicit in defence counsel’s position on sentence.
disposition
count 1, possession of a firearm without a
license (s. 91), is stayed on the consent of the parties pursuant to the
kienapple
principle.
mr. anderson has been in custody since his
arrest on december 16, 2023. from then until july 31, 2025, mr. anderson has
spent 594 real days in pre-sentence custody, which enhances to 891 days after
summers
credit. this amount converts to approximately two years, five months, and nine
days.
count 5, breach of a weapons prohibition order
(s. 117.01), will use 180 days of the pre-sentence custody. the balance of the
pre-sentence custody is 711 days. it will be attributed in full on count 2,
possession of a loaded restricted firearm without authorization (s. 95). i will
also note 180 days of pre-sentence custody concurrently on count 3, breach
of the curfew condition of a release order (s. 145(5)), count 4, breach of
the no weapons condition of a release order (s. 145(5)), and count 6, breach of
the keep the peace and be of good behaviour condition of a probation order (s.
733.1).
the further jail sentence of two years less one
day will be served as follows:
•
count 2, possession of a loaded restricted
firearm without authorization: two years less one day;
•
count 3, breach of the curfew condition of a
release order: one day concurrent;
•
count 4, breach of the no weapons condition of a
release order: one day concurrent;
•
count 5, breach of a weapons prohibition order: one
day concurrent; and
•
count 6: breach of the keep the peace and be of
good behaviour condition of a probation order: one day concurrent.
the pre-sentence custody after
summers
credit
and the further jail sentence combine for a global sentence of four years, five months, and eight days.
i impose a two-year term of probation. the order
will include a condition that directs the probation officer to enroll mr.
anderson in culturally appropriate programming to address his substance abuse
and mental health challenges.
mr. anderson will provide a sample of his dna in
view of his criminal record and the seriousness of the offences. he will be
subject to a s. 109 order for life in all respects. the firearm and ammunition
are forfeited. i waive the victim surcharge given the lengthy custodial term.
released:  july
31, 2025
signed:
justice davin m.k. garg
the submissions on this issue were made on july 17 and 31.
i have reasoned by analogy to
r. v. morris
,
2021 onca 680
at para.
170
.
see exhibit 6 at trial.
i do not use as aggravating the breach of the weapons prohibition order since
it will attract a consecutive sentence.
based on representations from counsel, i am treating the one entry on mr.
anderson’s cpic for assault with a weapon as a conviction for simple assault.
i rely on defence counsel’s calculations, cognizant that they are estimates due
to the possibility of human error.
during partial lock downs, the institution completed “single cell” dayroom
times, which allows the inmates from one cell on a unit access to dayroom,
shower, and phones on a rotational basis.
defence counsel corrected the age from what was reported in the enhanced
pre-sentence report.
indeed, the enhanced pre-sentence report reads, “leo’s involvement in crime and
substance misuse made it difficult for him to be actively involved in [his
son’s] life as he was before”.
see
e.g.
,
morris
at para.
104
.
see exhibit 5 on sentencing.
“a refusal to acknowledge, much less take responsibility for, criminal conduct,
did not augur well for mr. morris’s rehabilitative potential and raises real
concerns about the risk that he will reoffend”.
see also
r. v. nur
,
2011 onsc 4874
at para.
149
.
the decision is included at tab 4 of exhibit 1 on sentencing.
i used a formula that calculates one year as 365 days and one
month as 30.417 days:
r. v. shaikh
,
2019 onca 895
at footnote 2. i converted
the pre-sentence custody in this manner in order to articulate the global
sentence. however, to ensure precision, the pre-sentence custody will be officially
noted in days.