ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v.
suleiman
, 2025 oncj 697
date: november 18, 2025
court file no.: toronto
24 48122122
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
ali suleiman
before justice maylor
heard on october
20-21, 2025
reasons for judgment
released on november 18, 2025
s. dosanjh................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
j. schiller....................................................................... counsel
for the accused ali suleiman
maylor j.:
introduction
the accused, ali suleiman, faces charges of knowingly possessing
an unlicensed, loaded restricted firearm while prohibited. he argues that the
police actions were unconstitutional and claims he was unaware of the nature of
his possession.
the accused argues that the police actions were motivated solely
by racial profiling, in violation of
s. 9
of the
canadian charter of rights
and freedoms
. he also maintains that he was unaware that the satchel he was
carrying contained a loaded handgun.
for the reasons that follow, the
charter
challenge is
dismissed. the defence account of inadvertent possession of the gun is also
rejected as not credible.
analysis
evidence
police constable (pc) angus li was part of the primary response
unit for the summer safety program on july 18, 2024. he responded to what was
believed to be a possible gunshots call. dispatch reported three loud pops on
the north side of a residential area near a greenbelt. he arrived on scene at 3:40
am, about three minutes after being dispatched. pc li was in uniform and
operating a marked police vehicle. he described driving through the residential
area toward the complainant’s address and encountering the accused and another
individual walking along the roadside. they were the only people he observed in
the area. he described the accused as a black male wearing a grey sweater and a
dark satchel across his body. the other person was a black male in dark clothing,
wearing a baseball cap and a dark surgical mask. pc li drove nearby and asked,
"are you guys good?" the accused responded, “yes, i am okay.” the
officer said, “stop for a second, i need to speak to you guys." before he
could speak further, they continued walking and then sprinted away. pc li
watched them run in tandem.
pc li testified that he wanted to speak with them to verify the
complaint made to the police. they were the only pedestrians. he arrived near
the green belt within three minutes of being dispatched. he explained that the
noise could have been gunshots, fireworks, or a vehicle backfire and wanted to
determine whether they had heard the noise and could be witnesses. he needed to
assess the seriousness of the investigation.
after informing dispatch of what happened, pc li pursued the
accused and the other individual while driving his vehicle. as another officer,
pc abiodan, arrived, the accused and his associate changed direction. the
accused ran in the opposite direction, past li’s car. pc abiodan pursued the
accused, while li pursued the associate.
pc abiodan’s pursuit of the accused along a dark, deserted
residential street was captured on the officer’s body worn camera (bwc). during
the chase, pc abiodan initially testified that he saw what he believed to be
the accused reach across his body, remove a black firearm, and drop it. at that
point, the officer drew his police-issued gun. pc abiodan insisted that he
clearly recalled the accused holding something black that made a loud clank
when it hit the ground. the officer jumped over the firearm during the pursuit.
the accused also removed and discarded his sweater. the officer could not recall
whether anything else was removed and dropped by the accused.
when the court reviewed the bwc video of the chase, it was of low
quality, and the action was blurred at times. however, it appears that the
accused removed the satchel containing a gun from around his body and threw it
on the ground while being pursued. as the officer passed over the gun and
satchel on the road, he drew his firearm during the chase. the accused was
ultimately apprehended by the officer and arrested for possession of the
firearm. when asked to identify himself inside the police cruiser, the accused initially
provided a false name. after being cautioned, he eventually disclosed his
correct identification to the police officer.
the bwc video of pc li retrieving the firearm shows that the
firearm was near the satchel in the middle of the road, indicating that the items
were likely dropped at the same time.
the accused testified about his initial interaction with the
police. he said that pc li drove by and asked whether he and his associate were
okay. the accused replied affirmatively. he believed the officer would try to
harass him because of past negative encounters. the accused admitted to having
a significant criminal record. he asked his associate, whom he described as a
cannabis dealer, if he was okay; the associate did not respond. the accused
maintained that he ran only because his associate ran. he also said that his
ptsd caused him to run, although he did not explain how his past trauma was
linked to his associate's running.
the law:
section 9
of the
charter
.
section
9
of the
charter
affirms that everyone has the right not to be
arbitrarily detained or imprisoned. the timing of a detention is significant
because it triggers other rights. determining whether an individual has been
detained is an objective process based on the circumstances of the encounter.
the
deprivation of an individual’s right to walk away from state authorities can
occur in two ways: either by physical detention or by psychological detention.
psychological detention occurs when the individual is legally required to
comply with a restrictive request or demand, or, in the absence of a legal
obligation, when a reasonable person would feel they have no choice but to
comply. when assessing psychological detention, courts may consider: (a) how a reasonable
person would perceive the circumstances of the encounter; (b) the nature of
police conduct, including language used, physical contact, location, presence
of others, and the duration of the encounter; and (c) relevant characteristics
or circumstances of the person, such as age, physical size, minority status, or
level of understanding:
r. v. grant
,
2009 scc 32
at paras
43-44
.
it
is important to note that not every interaction with the police qualifies as a
detention under the
charter
, even if a person is under investigation for
a crime, questioned, or physically delayed during police contact:
r. v.
suberu
,
2009 scc 33
at para.
23
.
racial profiling
when p.c. li encountered the accused and his associate, they were
not detained. the officer was about to begin questioning to assess the
seriousness of the investigation when they fled. there is no evidence from the
accused to support the claim that he felt detained. his only evidence was that
he believed the police would harass him. he was not physically or
psychologically detained before he fled from the police: see
r v nesbeth
2008 onca 579
paras
13-14
.
regarding the defence argument about racial profiling, there is
no evidence to support that bias. pc li arrived at the scene of the complaint within
three minutes of being dispatched. during the early hours of the morning, the
only people visible in the area were the accused and his associate. it was
entirely reasonable for the officer to determine whether they had any knowledge
of the sound of possible gunshots. when they decided to flee, it was reasonable
for the police officer to pursue them, given the genuine possibility that he
was responding to a gun call. the combination of factors was sufficient to give
the police reasonable grounds to believe the accused was involved in criminal
activity at the time of arrest. the factors included the following:
(i)
the police were investigating a report of possible gunshots in
the area where the complaint was made.
(ii)
the accused immediately ran when the officer indicated he wanted
to ask further questions.
(iii)
while being pursued, the accused discarded his satchel containing
a loaded firearm.
(iv)
the accused ran at full speed early in the morning, in the dark,
along a deserted street, while a police officer chased him, yelling at him.
(v)
when he was tackled, the accused continued to struggle, attempting
to escape the officer’s grasp until he was finally subdued.
when the police officer began his investigation and spoke to the
accused, the accused was not detained, and his
s. 9
charter
rights were
not engaged. when the police finally detained the accused after an active
pursuit, there were reasonable grounds for that detention:
r v nesbeth
,
supra
,
paras
21 and 25
.
possession of the loaded firearm
notwithstanding pc abiodan's evidence that he saw the accused
discard a firearm, it is more probable that the officer observed the firearm as
it fell from the satchel the accused dropped.
the accused testified that, unbeknownst to him, his associate—a
cannabis dealer—was carrying a satchel containing a loaded handgun. the accused
stated that the associate asked him to hold the satchel while the associate
adjusted his belt and shoes. the accused explained that he wore the satchel
across his body rather than holding it briefly and then returning it because he
thought it looked “cool.” he maintained that he did not look inside the open satchel
because that would be disrespectful.
to establish possession, the prosecution must prove the accused
had knowledge of the loaded gun and control over it. in the court’s view, the
accused’s defence lacks credibility based on ordinary life experiences, common
sense, and logic:
r v kruk
2024 scc 7 (canlii)
, 2024 scj no. 7, paras
71-73
, 81, and 92.
the accused’s defence is fundamentally unbelievable, with each
detail becoming increasingly unlikely. the accused claims that the owner of the
loaded gun was his associate, a drug dealer, who was with him during the
initial police encounter. he alleges that the dealer asked him to hold the
satchel containing the gun because the dealer needed to adjust his belt and
shoes. however, there is no evidence explaining how or why a cross-body satchel
worn close to the body would interfere with the dealer adjusting his own belt
and shoes. the main purpose of a cross-body satchel is to store items while
keeping one’s arms and hands free. therefore, the accused’s version of events
lacks credibility. additionally, there are no details about what specific
adjustments necessitated the handoff of the satchel. again, there would have
been no reason to remove the satchel to simply adjust one’s belt and shoes.
the accused’s account of events raises further questions about
his credibility and the implausibility of his answers.
the accused would have the court believe that the drug dealer did
not immediately want the return of his open bag containing a loaded gun, but
instead allowed the accused to wear it because the accused thought it was “cool.”
this was a drug dealer the accused had dealt with on at least two previous
occasions. the court does not believe that a drug dealer would ask a customer
to hold an open satchel containing the dealer’s weapon.
moreover, the accused’s position that looking inside the satchel
would be disrespectful is inconsistent with wearing the satchel without asking
for permission, which is, in fact, more disrespectful.
the accused claims he ran because his ptsd was triggered when he
saw his associate dealer run. however, he provides no explanation of the origin
of this ptsd, assuming he meant post traumatic stress disorder, which he
alleges influenced his actions. the lack of detail in the accused's account
does not help his defence; it increases suspicion and disbelief. additionally,
he said the associate ran first, and he followed, but pc li observed them
fleeing together. given the accused’s lack of credibility and reliability, the
court accepts pc li’s evidence over the accused’s conflicting version.
while fleeing the police, the accused claimed he believed the
satchel contained as much as two pounds of marijuana, which is not considered
heavy, yet he stated he threw it off his body because it was too heavy. the
video shows him as an able-bodied young man running from the police at full
speed, not hindered by the weight of the satchel. it was shortly after he
decided to discard the dangerous contraband he was carrying that the police
officer was able to catch him. logic indicates he discarded the gun inside the
satchel because of its illegality and because he was subject to a firearms
prohibition order. the accused’s alternative explanation is incredulous.
the
accused has no burden to prove anything in this trial. the responsibility
always lies with the crown to prove the elements of the offences beyond a
reasonable doubt. however, when the accused presents a story that contradicts
reason, logic, and common sense, the weaknesses in his story must be considered
to determine whether his evidence raises a reasonable doubt. this court finds
that the satchel and loaded handgun belonged to the accused, not to his
associate. the accused had the requisite knowledge and control of the loaded
firearm.
the
accused’s implausible story failed to raise a doubt. it is difficult to believe
that a drug dealer, even a cannabis dealer in the era of legalized marijuana,
would casually hand over his loaded gun with nine rounds of ammunition to a
customer so that the dealer could make minor, unexplained adjustments to his
attire. furthermore, the accused’s actions after the arrest—initially lying
about his identity—only reinforce his efforts to avoid responsibility.
conclusion
the prosecution's burden of proof is beyond a reasonable doubt.
it is a heavy burden; it is insufficient to believe a defendant is probably
guilty—there must be certainty of guilt. a reasonable doubt is a doubt grounded
in reason and common sense, based on the evidence or the absence of evidence in
the record before the court:
r v lifchus
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
39
.
having
reviewed all the evidence, this court finds that the accused, ali suleiman, is
guilty of the following
criminal code offences
set out in the
information before the court:
count 1, knowingly being in unauthorized
possession of a restricted firearm, contrary to s. 92(1); count 2, unauthorized
possession of a restricted firearm with ammunition, contrary to s. 95(2); and
count 3, possession of a firearm contrary to a prohibition order, s. 117.01.
given
that counts 1 and 2 are firearms possession offences arising from the same
transaction, there will be a conditional stay of count 1, the s.92(1) offence,
pursuant to
r v kienapple
1974 canlii 14 (scc)
, 1 scr 729. therefore, convictions
should be registered only for counts 2 and 3.
released:  november 18, 2025
signed: justice d.
maylor