ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. chakasim,
2025 oncj 171
date:
2025 03 31
court
file: toronto #24-50001215; 24-50002761
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
juanita
chakasim
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on march 28, 2025
written
reasons provided on march 31, 2025
mr. k. garrett....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ms. s. dubb................................................................................... counsel
for ms. chakasim
jones j.:
introduction
every day in provincial court, accused persons plead guilty to lesser criminal
offences. a startling number of those people are detained in custody, having
been unable to obtain bail. they are overwhelmingly vulnerable, marginalized,
and from historically disadvantaged communities. when presented with a crown
offer of “time served”, accused persons accept, plead guilty, and are placed on
a probation order. the probation orders inevitably include terms that have
become commonly accepted and are often imposed without consideration of their
potential consequences or utility.
on march 28, 2025, juanita chakasim appeared before me in
gladue
court.
she was detained at the vanier centre for women and wished to represent herself.
she accepted responsibility for two counts of assault. the parties presented a
joint position, noting the time she had already served since her arrest, and
recommended a three-year probation order.
in the following reasons, i explain why i did not accept the joint submission.
in my view, the amount of pre-sentence custody sought to be endorsed as part of
the plea was excessive, and the duration and proposed terms of the probation
order were not only unnecessary but almost certainly detrimental to ms.
chakasim’s long-term rehabilitation. the joint position also failed to
adequately reflect ms. chakasim’s status as an indigenous canadian and the extraordinary
difficulties she has faced thus far in her life. of even more significant
concern, due to her lack of stable housing and mental health diagnosis, the terms
of the probation order would be difficult for her to follow. this, in turn,
would lead to an inevitable charge of failing to comply with that order in the
future, placing her back in custody.
guilty pleas and supporting facts
ms. chakasim represented herself for the guilty pleas. ms. dubb was
able to assist her with sentencing submissions.
on december 2, 2024, ms. chakasim attempted to enter 219 george street
in toronto. this is a toronto community housing building. she was asked to
leave by a security officer. a confrontation erupted between them. ms. chakasim
punched him once in the jaw and kicked him once in the leg. he did not sustain
any injuries.
on december 30, 2024, ms. chakasim entered an lcbo at 777 bay street in
toronto. she stole a bottle of alcohol. as she was leaving the lcbo, a security
officer instructed her to pay. she threw the bottle instead. shortly
thereafter, a mall security officer stopped her elsewhere in the mall. she spat
on him.
neither of these two men were injured as a result of the december 30, 2024,
incident. ms. chakasim pleaded guilty to both counts of assault.
the crown proceeded by way of summary conviction.
background of ms. chakasim
ms. chakasim is a 31-year-old indigenous canadian. for this judgment, i
will reproduce only portions of what i learned about her life history, out of
respect for her privacy and dignity and that of her family.
she
has been experiencing homelessness and has been residing in shelters. she has a
daughter, 12, who lives with another relative. she supports herself through
odsp payments, although she has not received those payments for a lengthy period.
she is unable to work. she hopes to regain access to her odsp payments in the near
future.
she
was diagnosed at a young age with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (fasd). at
some point in her life (she could not remember precisely when), she experienced
a head injury that has left her with further cognitive impairment. she has
difficulty reading, standing, and concentrating.
over
the years, she has struggled with addictions to drugs and alcohol. she has
fought hard to remain sober in the recent past, but this is an ongoing
challenge.
she
has been working with a social worker recently to obtain housing, remain sober,
and hopefully regain custody of her daughter. she attends all saints church in
toronto regularly for support and rehabilitative programming. she does that of
her own volition and intends to continue upon her release from custody. she has
also connected with an aboriginal community organization.
her
time at vanier was very difficult. she broke down in tears in court, describing
to me the conditions of imprisonment. briefly summarized, she has been strip
searched in front of other inmates, placed in segregation, and insulted by an
officer who used derogatory and insulting language. this has taken a serious
toll on her mental and physical well-being.
proposed joint position
ms.
chakasim spent 43 days in pre-trial detention at vanier. the parties proposed i
credit her for 65 days (applying
summers
) and place her on probation for
three years. the terms of probation would include attending counseling or
programming as directed by her probation officer and reporting to probation regularly
to ensure compliance.
the
joint position was informed, in part, by ms. chakasim’s lengthy prior criminal
record. it includes previous convictions for assault and failing to comply with
court orders.
“undercutting” joint positions
in
r. v. anthony-cook,
2016 scc 43
, the supreme court of canada held that
joint positions presented by the crown and defence should only be rejected when
“reasonable and informed persons would view the proposed sentence as a
breakdown in the proper functioning of the justice system”: see para. 34.
however,
the court explained that the same concerns do not arise when “undercutting” a
joint position as opposed to “jumping” one. at para. 52, the supreme court
wrote that in assessing the severity of a joint position, and whether it is
excessive, sentencing courts should “be mindful of the power imbalance that may
exist between crown and defence,
particularly where the accused is
self-represented or in custody at the time of sentencing
” (my emphasis
added.)
that
was precisely the scenario that ms. chakasim found herself in. she was
self-represented for her plea and was desperate to escape jail. unsurprisingly,
she accepted whatever position the crown presented to her. as i will explain,
the position was not adequately considered and accepting it would have been
contrary to the public interest.
by
making these remarks, i do not mean to call into question the professionalism
of crown or defence counsel. mr. garrett was following instructions provided to
him by another member of his office in a very busy court, which had over 250
lines to start the day. he acted commendably, professionally and
compassionately throughout this proceeding. this is standard procedure for
crown counsel in these overburdened courts. ms. dubb, assisting ms. chakasim as
best she could, made excellent submissions to help me understand ms. chakasim’s
plight. if her instructions were to accept the joint position, or at least to
assist ms. chakasim with sentencing when she received the joint position, there
was nothing more she could have done.
sentencing principles
a
sentence must be proportionate to “the gravity of the offence committed and the
moral blameworthiness of the offender”:
criminal code
section 718.1. the
assessment of moral culpability considers several key factors. ms. chakasim is
indigenous.
section 718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
states:
a court that imposes a sentence
shall also take into consideration the following principles:
(e) all available sanctions, other
than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with
the harm done to victims or the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
in
r. v. gladue
,
1999 canlii 679 (scc)
, and
r. v. ipeelee
,
2012 scc
13
, the supreme court of canada held that this section is remedial and is
intended to deal with the continuing crisis of over-representation of
indigenous offenders in the canadian criminal justice system:
gladue
at
para.
33
;
ipeelee
at para.
59
.
in
r. v. buswa
,
2023 oncj 146
, justice chamberlain outlined the
considerations that sentencing courts must take into account when applying
these principles, as set out in paras. 10-11:
today, this crisis is driven by alienation, poverty, substance
abuse, lower educational attainment, lower rates of employment, and prejudice
experienced by indigenous people in canada. sentencing judges are to take
judicial notice of how canada’s colonial history and post-colonial
assimilationist policies have translated into these terrible outcomes: gladue
at para.
83
; ipeelee at para.
60
. these systemic and background factors do not
excuse nor justify criminal conduct. instead, they provide the necessary
context for understanding and evaluating case-specific information during the
sentencing exercise: ipeelee at para.
83
.
systemic and background factors
affect the incidence of crime and recidivism for all offenders. however, as the
supreme court recognized, the circumstances of indigenous offenders are
different from other offenders because many indigenous people are “victims of
systemic and direct discrimination” and “dislocation” and are “substantially
affected by poor social and economic conditions”: gladue at para.
68
.
there
is no requirement for an offender to demonstrate a causal connection between
“systemic or background factors” and the offence before the court. instead, the
court must be satisfied they are “
tied in some way to
the particular offender and offence” see
r. v. f.h.l.
,
2018
onca 83
, at paras.
38-41
.
section
718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
encompasses the values of
restorative justice.
in
gladue
,
the supreme court explained that the “concept and principles of a
restorative approach will necessarily have to be developed over time in the
jurisprudence, as different issues and different conceptions of sentencing are
addressed in their appropriate context”: see para. 71. a sentencing court
should consider the needs of the victims, the community, and the offender.
the
ontario court of appeal explained in
r. v. king,
2022 onca 665
, that
judges, when exercising their discretionary power, must be aware of the
realities of the indigenous peoples who appear before them. the court wrote the
following at para. 170:
…by this, we mean the
historical and present-day treatment of indigenous people that continues to
perpetuate patterns of discrimination and has resulted in “lower educational
attainment, lower incomes, higher unemployment, higher rates of substance abuse
and suicide, and of course higher levels of incarceration for aboriginal
peoples”:
ipeelee
, at para.
60
. failing to recognize these realities can
lead to further discrimination against indigenous people and undermine efforts
to apply the law impartially and equitably.
furthermore,
the supreme court of canada has directed trial judges to consider the potential
impact of a proposed sentence on the individual before them. regarding
indigenous canadians, in
r.
v. hilbach
,
2023 scc 3
, the supreme court noted that
“the effects of a sentencing measure may be particularly severe when
circumstances affecting indigenous offenders are considered”: see para.
45.
fasd, proportionality, and moral culpability
ms.
chakasim’s moral culpability for these offences is significantly mitigated by
her circumstances, especially her diagnosis of fasd.
the
canada fasd research network developed a standard definition of fasd in 2019
:
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
(fasd) is a diagnostic term used to describe impacts on the brain and body of
individuals prenatally exposed to alcohol. fasd is a lifelong disability. individuals
with fasd will experience some degree of challenges in their daily living and
need support with motor skills, physical health, learning, memory, attention,
communication, emotional regulation, and social skills to reach their full
potential. each individual with fasd is unique and has areas of both strengths
and challenges.
no
formal medical evidence was provided at the sentencing hearing about ms.
chakasim’s particular diagnosis of fasd. in a busy case management and plea
court, it is often unrealistic to expect this, and she did not know if any such
report existed. obtaining such a new report would have required a lengthy
adjournment, at the very least, necessitating ms. chakasim's repeated
appearances in court.
further engagement with the criminal justice system through multiple court
appearances is often taken for granted as an inevitable feature of monitoring a
case’s progress. yet there are real costs associated with prolonging a case,
even for an ostensible beneficial purpose. that includes, at a minimum, the enhanced
stigma she would have to bear in a justice system that already alienates our
indigenous peoples.
as
the crown was offering a time-served position, i instead took judicial notice
of notorious and incontrovertible facts about fasd. i recognize that i must
approach the application of this information with caution in the absence of
expert testimony. however, to ignore this highly mitigating factor would
perpetuate a grave injustice and almost certainly result in a sentence that fails
to properly assess ms. chakasim’s moral culpability for her offences.
the
relevance of fasd to assessing an offender’s moral culpability is well-documented
in prior court decisions. in
r. v. j.p.,
2020 skca 52
, the saskatchewan
court of appeal held that a “combination of
gladue
factors and fasd will
often serve to reduce an offender’s moral culpability in the context of a
consideration of the proportionality principle”: see para. 65. in
r. v.
dayfoot
,
2007 oncj 332
, justice shamai commented on the significant
reduction in moral responsibility that accompanies offences of this nature
committed by persons with fasd. her honour wrote, and i agree, that “to punish
behaviour which results from a clinically recognized disability runs contrary
to the principles of criminal law”: see para. 23.
the
vast majority of fasd subjects are prone to attention deficits and impulsivity.
i find that ms. chakasim’s assaults were directly linked to her diagnosis of
fasd. they were impulsive and reactive decisions that demonstrate the
challenges she faces in regulating her behavior. she expressed remorse for her
actions by pleading guilty. she did not mean to harm anyone. this mitigating
factor must be given great weight.
pre-sentence custody and probation
the
parties jointly recommended that ms. chakasim’s time in pre-sentence custody be
noted as part of the sentence. this is something commonly done when a plea of
this nature is accepted. yet, i do not consider it appropriate for this case.
ms.
chakasim’s experience in pre-trial detention was harrowing. she was visibly
shaken in court when describing her mistreatment. she was very concerned that she
might have to spend even more time in jail. while in custody, she lost contact
with some of her community support services and would need to rebuild those
connections upon her release. she did not know what was happening with her
daughter but hoped to reconnect with her family as soon as possible upon her
release to find out.
one
wonders why she was placed in pre-sentence custody for such a long period at
all. she should never have been held for more time than what was required for
an initial bail appearance. the progression of her bail situation and whether the
crown contested her release were not the subjects of submissions, and i make no
further comment in this regard. i do note that this appears to be yet another
example of how time spent in pre-trial detention has come at a considerable
cost to an accused person’s physical and mental health, stability and
connections to community support networks, for little to no societal benefit
whatsoever.
simply
because an offender has spent time in jail does not mean that her criminal
record should reflect that stark reality. ms. chakasim should never have been
in custody. to reflect the 43 days spent at vanier on her record would grossly
misrepresent what is an appropriate sentence for these crimes, which i have
concluded is a short probation order. it is an error of principle for a
sentencing court to endorse “time-served” when that represents a sentence that
would never have been imposed by the court in the first place if the accused
had pleaded guilty while out of custody: see
r. v. singh,
2023 onsc 4949
,
at para.
91
.
in
ms. chakasim’s case, endorsing this standard practice would be manifestly
unjust and would perpetuate the very legacy of colonialism that
gladue
courts are meant to remedy. prof. david milward of the university of victoria
noted in
the sentencing of aboriginal accused with fasd: a search for
different pathways
, ubc law review, vol. 47, iss. 3, art. 6 (2014), that
inmates with fasd are particularly vulnerable to being caught up in the
criminal justice system in general and to being exploited in prison in
particular: see p. 1046. he concluded there are clear “linkages to be drawn
between the effects of colonialism on aboriginal peoples, fasd amongst
aboriginal peoples, and aboriginal over-incarceration”.
an
appropriate sentence should emphasize rehabilitation and restorative justice
principles. specific deterrence plays little, if any, role for an offender with
fasd. i, therefore, declined to note any of the pre-sentence custody on her
record.
the
parties further jointly proposed a three-year probation order to run
concurrently on both counts. the terms of that probation order included that
ms. chakasim take counselling or programming as directed by her probation
officer and sign any necessary consents or releases to ensure she was
compliant. she was also expected to report regularly to probation.
i
understand why this was recommended. it, too, is a standard practice in our
plea courts. yet, i find it is also problematic and unjustified for ms.
chakasim. in some cases, the imposition of these terms may be necessary to
promote public safety and promote the long-term rehabilitation of an offender.
but not always. special care must be given before imposing these terms for vulnerable
individuals.
i
am concerned that ms. chakasim would have great difficulty complying with a
three-year probation order. if she misses an appointment to report or fails to
attend a program meeting, she could be charged with breaching the probation
order. she would then be placed back in custody, likely unable to make bail,
and disconnected from her support network. the tragic cycle of arrest,
incarceration, and traumatization will inevitably repeat itself.
ms.
chakasim faces numerous challenges in her life. she is attempting to focus on
her personal growth and improvement. she is already engaged with community-based
resources, including her church and indigenous programming. i see no value in
subjecting her to additional state-mandated supervision. her commitment to her
rehabilitation is sincere. but she is, of course, also human and only capable
of bearing so much.
the
role of the probation officer is a feature of a colonial justice system. this
must be considered when sentencing an indigenous canadian. the benefit of
supervised probation, when placed in this context, should not be presumed.
shauna kelly explains this well in her article,
a different approach:
rethinking probation,
located in the rule of law report, volume 6, issue 2
(june 2023):
the probation officer is an
employee embedded within the colonialist system, in which systemic
discrimination and racism continue to run rampant. and this is the context in
which the court must be presented with submissions to properly contextualize
whether a reporting probation is needed in the unique and specific case that is
being presented to them. it is recommended by the author that where there are
sufficient and realized community supports with tangible plans and an
articulated path to move forward, deference should be given to those
restorative justice processes, and proper submissions should align with this.
it is pertinent for counsel to present a case to the court that can provide
some assurance of accountability and that explains how that can be achieved
without the use of a reporting term on a probation order, where appropriate.
i
agree with and endorse ms. kelly’s analysis. a three-year term of probation
will likely keep ms. chakasim within the criminal justice system far longer
than necessary. if ms. chakasim found the terms onerous and demanding, or that
she was unfortunately unable to comply with all the expectations placed on her,
i would have set a vulnerable person up to fail. if she ultimately gave up with
attempting to comply, the order would not have achieved its rehabilitative
purpose. indeed, as ms. kelly explains, it would achieve “the exact opposite.”
these
are precisely the concerns that the supreme court of canada identified in
r.
v. zora
,
2020 scc 14
, regarding onerous bail conditions. the court wrote at
para. 79, the fact is that “indigenous people, overrepresented in the criminal
justice system, are also disproportionately affected by unnecessary and
unreasonable bail conditions and resulting breach charges”: see also abby deshman
& nicole myers, set up to fail: bail and the revolving door of pre-trial
detention (canadian civil liberties association and education trust, 2014).
that same logic applies to probation conditions.
ms.
dubb articulated a plan for ms. chakasim in the community that i am satisfied
will promote ms. chakasim’s rehabilitation without the need for this additional
level of supervision.
conclusion
the
truth and reconciliation commission of canada (2015) called upon federal,
provincial, and territorial governments to commit to the elimination of the
over-incarceration of indigenous people in the criminal justice system. it also
endorsed the united nations expert mechanism on the rights of indigenous people's
recommendation that “substantive changes are required within the criminal legal
system.” similarly, in
r. v. barton,
2019 scc 33
,
moldaver j.
wrote at para. 199: “when it comes to truth and reconciliation from a criminal
justice perspective, much-needed work remains to be done.”
a
restorative justice approach to ms. chakasim’s sentencing should focus on
encouraging and trusting her reliance on the community-based organizations where
she has already established meaningful connections. that is how to promote her
long-term rehabilitation and reduce her engagement with the criminal justice
system. rethinking our approach to the routine imposition of lengthy probation
orders is, in my view, an essential first step to embracing meaningful change with
respect to how our criminal justice system treats our indigenous peoples.
i
sentenced ms. chakasim to a suspended sentence with six months' probation. the
probation order required that she report only once, to sign the order. she was prohibited
from possessing weapons, was ordered to not have any direct contact with the victims
and was also not allowed to attend the addresses where the assaults occurred.
nothing more was required.
the
victim fine surcharges were waived.
released:   march 31, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
what is fasd?
.canada fasd research network, available online:
https://canfasd.ca/what-is-fasd/
it can be difficult to find a clinic able to make such a
diagnosis, and wait lists can stretch from months to years: see
a
caregiver’s guide to an fasd diagnosis,
canada fasd research network
(2020), available online:
https://canfasd.ca/wp-content/uploads/publications/canfasd-caregiver-guide-to-diagnosis-jan2020-interactive.pdf
spotlight on gladue: challenges, experiences, and possibilities in canada’s
criminal justice system
, department of justice, government of canada (january
19, 2023), available online:
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/jr/gladue/p3.html