ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. chow
, 2025 oncj 445
date:
2025 08 28
court
file no.:  toronto / 24-48103094
between:
his
majesty the king
respondent
—
and —
rayquoi chow
applicant
before
justice lori anne thomas
heard
on june 13, 2025
oral
reasons for judgment released on july 29, 2025
written
reasons for judgment released on august 25, 2025
revised
written reasons for judgment released on august 28, 2025
roots ghadia ................................................................................ counsel
for the applicant
michael wilson......................................................................... counsel
for the respondent
thomas j.:
rayquoi chow, the applicant, is charged with 10
offences from january 3, 2024, including robbery, aggravated assault, dangerous
operation of a motor vehicle causing bodily harm, discharging a firearm with
intent to endanger life, and various charges relating to possession and
careless storage of a firearm, with an altered serial number.
introduction
mr. chow was charged on january 11, 2024. the
trial was scheduled to proceed august 11-15, 2025, that is 19 months and 4 days
after the charge; otherwise calculated as 19.1 months
.
the parties agreed that there was a delay in disclosure.
however, the impact of the delayed disclosure was an issue for the application.
the other issues were the impact of the delay on
the applicant’s silent reservation of election and whether the days the defence
was not available, after an adjournment precipitated by the disclosure delay, are
defence-only delay.
further, if the silent reservation of the
election is not a defence delay, then the question is whether it qualifies as
an exceptional circumstance.
summary of findings
the application was dismissed orally, with written
reasons to follow.
despite the crown and police’s inexplicable
delay in providing disclosure, i found both parties equally responsible for
failing to follow up when it should have been evident that essential disclosure
was still missing.
i also found that the defence contributed to
delay by failing to make an election as requested, required, and promised.
further delay arose when defence counsel was unavailable for trial dates,
despite having elected to proceed to trial.
alternatively, the defence’s silent reservation
of its election constituted an exceptional circumstance that was unforeseeable
by the crown. although the crown took reasonable steps to mitigate the
resulting delay, it was unsuccessful due to defence counsel’s unavailability.
this case underscores the importance of holding
timely elections, managing proactive disclosure effectively, and adhering to
established scheduling protocols. strengthening administrative oversight and
enforcing practice directions may reduce delay and improve trial efficiency in
future cases.
the legal framework
the supreme court in
jordan established a
presumptive ceiling for reasonable delay in provincial court trials at 18
months and in superior court trials at
30 months. once this presumptive
ceiling has been exceeded, the matter must be stayed upon application. in
varennes
,
the court recently provided a succinct explanation of when a matter should
be stayed due to an 11(b)
charter
violation.
in a general sense, establishing a breach of s. 11(b) first
requires a claimant to demonstrate that the total delay from the charge to the
actual or anticipated end of trial (minus defence delay) exceeds the
presumptive ceilings of 18 months or 30 months established by this court
in
r. v. jordan
,
2016 scc 27
, 1 s.c.r. 631. then, the
crown can rebut the presumptively unreasonable delay by establishing there were
exceptional circumstances (para. 47).
defence delay is either delay waived by the defence or solely
caused by the conduct of the defence. this does not apply to legitimate efforts
to make full answer and defence. however, it can also apply to illegitimate
actions (such as delay tactics, frivolous applications, and inaction) and
instances where the court and the crown were prepared to proceed, but the defence
was not.
an exceptional circumstance was described as:
exceptional circumstances lie outside the crown’s control in
the sense that (1) they are reasonably unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable,
and (2) crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays emanating from those
circumstances once they arise. so long as they meet this definition, they will
be considered exceptional. they need not meet a further hurdle of being rare or
entirely uncommon.
the exceptional circumstance for consideration in this case was a
discrete event, that is, an event or circumstance that was reasonably
unforeseeable or unavoidable and would be deducted to the extent that it could
not be reasonably mitigated.
for the crown to rely on an exceptional circumstance, it must
show it took reasonable and available steps, even if unsuccessful, to address
the problem before the matter exceeded the delay ceiling.
in summary, the
jordan
framework requires:
1.
calculating
total delay from charge to anticipated end of trial.
2.
deducting any
delay attributable to the defence.
3.
if net delay
exceeds the ceiling (18 months for ocj), the delay is presumptively
unreasonable.
4.
the crown may
rebut this presumption by proving exceptional circumstances
positions of the parties
the applicant submitted that there were no
discrete events or exceptional circumstances that justified delay, nor any
defence delay. further, the delay was caused solely by delayed disclosure. the
applicant submitted that no delay should be attributable to the defence for failing
to elect a trial in the superior court in a timely fashion, and then electing
to have a trial in the ontario court of justice, as he attributed this decision
to delayed disclosure.
further, the applicant relied on
r. v. godin,
2009 scc 26
, in his submission that the defence’s unavailability cannot be
attributed as defence delay, since the adjournment of the preliminary hearing
was caused by crown delay.
the respondent submitted that the following
periods should be considered as defence delay:
(a)
a portion of the intake period during which the
crown submits no movement occurred;
(b)
the defence’s unavailability for the first
scheduled trial; and
(c)
some or all of the delay between the last date
offered for a preliminary hearing and the anticipated conclusion of the trial.
alternatively, the delay caused by the
applicant’s delayed election should be treated as an exceptional circumstance.
i rejected the crown’s submissions regarding the
attribution of delay to the defence for items (a) and (b). the arguments
presented did not sufficiently establish that these periods were solely caused
by defence conduct or constituted delay tactics. accordingly, they do not meet
the threshold for defence-attributable delay.
however, i accepted that the defence bears some
of the onus for the time period after the preliminary hearing and before the
anticipated conclusion of the trial, as well as for other periods.
i found that both parties were partly
responsible for their mutual lack of attention to the outstanding disclosure
until a couple of days before the preliminary hearing was scheduled to commence.
furthermore, i found that delay should be attributed to the defence, as they
were not available for the trial in 2025 and neglected to schedule it after mr.
chow signed a notice of election for an ocj trial. as such, on july 29, 2025, i
dismissed the application with brief oral reasons.
background and procedural history
mr. chow was arrested and charged on january 11,
2024. he was released 5 days later on a recognizance. since his first
appearance, ms. ghadia has been his counsel.
on february 7, 2024, ms. ghadia’s office
requested disclosure but was advised that a scope file had not been created and
was instructed to follow up in a month. on the same date, a designation was
signed and filed with the court.
at the february 27, 2024, appearance, it was
noted that ms. ghadia spoke with crown counsel, mr. ho, and they agreed to
adjourn the matter to discuss disclosure and hold a crown pre-trial (cpt).
at the april 23, 2024, appearance, ms. seymour,
then counsel with ms. ghadia’s office, stated that disclosure had been
requested four times, but nothing had been received.
the court suggested a 3-month
adjournment to get disclosure, and it was adjourned accordingly in the absence
of any representative for the defence.
by may 17, 2024, defence counsel’s associates
left the defence bar, which added to the workload for ms. ghadia and reduced
her availability.
initial disclosure was received on april 29,
2024. substantial disclosure was provided to the defence on may 17, 2024.
on may 17, 2024, the crown inquired whether the
defence was electing to proceed in the ontario court of justice (ocj) or the
superior court of justice (scj). there was no response to the question, as ms.
ghadia was focused on the disclosure.
on june 18, 2024, a detailed disclosure request
was sent to the crown, which responded on june 19, 2024, identifying the
requested items and specifying which items had been previously disclosed, along
with the dates of disclosure.
the assigned crown, mr. wilson, missed the june
17, 2024 cpt, but counsel agreed that the matter should proceed to a judicial pre-trial
(jpt). the agreed-upon date for the jpt was july 9, 2024.
on july 2, 2024, further disclosure was sent via
a usb drive, which included some of the requested videos.
at the july 9, 2024 jpt, it was noted that there
was significant missing disclosure, and the defence was electing to proceed by
trial in the ocj. the jpt judge stated the following on the jpt form:
•
election for ocj trial to be filed asap
[emphasis added];
•
there was a long list of outstanding disclosure
sent to the crown, but it was being vetted to be disclosed
shortly
[emphasis
added];
•
there would be (unnamed) 8-10 witnesses,
including the complainant and three witnesses from the scene;
•
one expert for fingerprints, whose evidence
would not be admitted by the defence;
•
the defence intended to bring a ss. 10(b) and
24(1)
charter
application, and “depending on trial dates, may also bring
an 11(b) application”;
•
a further jpt was “
only required if issues
with disclosure or 11b
time est [sic] needed” [emphasis added];
and
•
the crown believed 5 days was necessary, while
the defence proposed 7 days.
on july 10, 2024, the seven-day trial was
scheduled for february 24-28 and march 3-4, 2025. it was noted that the defence
was not available for february 10-23, 2025
,
when the crown and the court were available. in the trial scheduling form
(tsf), it was confirmed that the accused will attend the next court date (july
16, 2024) and make their election.
on july 16, 2024, defence informed the crown,
then the trial coordinator, that the applicant wished to have a preliminary
hearing, which would require only two days to conduct. the trial coordinator
notified the parties to attend the judicial intensive case management court
(jicmc) to obtain judicial authorization. though jicmc operated daily, instead
of attending the court, the defence requested a further jpt with the original
jpt judge. august 28, 2024 was selected as the second jpt date.
the august 28, 2024 jpt form noted the following:
•
outstanding disclosure: 17 officer notes, typed
notes for 2 officers, surveillance video from 15 addresses, photos, bwc x 2,
two icc videos, 911 call and video statements of 4 civilian witnesses;
•
now, only the complainant would be testifying;
all other evidence would be entered through a s. 540(7) application;
•
the defence indicated it wanted 2-3 officers
(unnamed in the jpt form), but the crown would make them available for
cross-examination;
•
the statement of issues to be filed by the
end of october 2024
[emphasis added];
•
defence to make election asap
[emphasis added];
•
the same comment about a further jpt for
disclosure or 11(b) remained; and
•
the crown believed 2.5 days was necessary, while
the defence proposed 2 days, and 2.5 days was noted as the estimated time for
the preliminary hearing.
in the september 12, 2024 tsf, it was noted that
the accused would attend on the next court date (september 17, 2024) and make
their election on the record. that did not happen. instead, the agent for the
defence simply noted the hearing dates for the record. the matter was adjourned
to the preliminary hearing date at the suggestion of the crown in court.
the notice of election was not filed in court
upon setting the preliminary hearing date, as required by the may 8, 2023
practice direction
. nor was it filed by
the end of october 2024, as indicated on the jpt form.
further disclosure was provided on september 5,
october 11, 17, 25 and november 25, 2024. there was no documented communication
from the defence after the preliminary hearing was scheduled until february 24,
2025.
both counsel were entrenched in a homicide trial
that commenced on january 13, 2025, initially anticipated to conclude on
january 31, 2025. then, in december 2024, the conclusion date was modified to
february 7, 2025. unexpectedly, the jury returned a verdict on february 23,
2025. it was not made clear why it extended another few weeks, but it does
explain why neither counsel exchanged correspondence until february 24, 2025.
once february 24 arrived, there was a flurry of
activity between the defence and the crown. on february 24, 2025, the defence
sent a pared-down version of its june 2024 request for outstanding disclosure.
there were some errors in the request, as it included some items which were
received on september 5 and october 25, 2024, such as the body worn camera
videos.
the crown responded after hours on february 24,
advising which items had already been disclosed and which were pending.  the
crown disclosed a significant amount of disclosure on february 25, 26 and 28,
2025.
on february 25, 2025, mr. chow signed a notice
of election for a trial in the ocj, waiving the requirement for a preliminary
hearing. mr. chow’s direction for a trial was not communicated to the crown,
nor was it filed with the court at that time.
on february 27, 2025, at the beginning of the
first day of the preliminary hearing, defence counsel, after advising of the
tranche of disclosure received on the eve of the preliminary hearing, requested
an adjournment of the preliminary hearing, while the crown opposed. defence counsel
told the court she would “have to reevaluate for [her] client’s interest …
[she] would have to decide whether or not [they needed] to convert this back to
a trial because it’s taken so long”. counsel stated that her office would have
been able to prepare the disclosure had it been received five weeks earlier.
when the scheduled preliminary hearing judge, justice
crosbie, realized that the election had not been made, she confirmed with defence
counsel:
“mr. clerk informs me that there's been,
against what i understand to be the rules of the court to be … no election.
that mr. chow was not put to his election is that your understanding, counsel?”
to which, defence advised the court
that she believed that was the case, that mr. chow was never put to his
election at any appearance; however, mr. chow did not attend any court
appearance, and the agent appeared by designation. furthermore, defence counsel
confirmed that the notice of election was never filed. counsel did not inform
the court that mr. chow had directed a trial in the ocj just days earlier.
justice crosbie did not grant the defence’s
request for an adjournment of the preliminary hearing but did grant an
adjournment until the 3
rd
scheduled day, march 3, 2025. justice
crosbie directed counsel to seek three continuation days from the trial
coordinator, whether they be in front of her honour or another judge. justice
crosbie agreed to move non-presiding days to accommodate the matter. finally,
the judge suggested that they schedule another date before her or the jpt judge
to have mr. chow put to his election, as he needed time to consider his options
and receive advice from counsel.
at the march 3
rd
appearance, defence
counsel indicated she did not have an opportunity to review the disclosure with
her client and have a meeting with him. therefore, the defence was unable to
proceed that day and sought an adjournment due to its inability to review the
disclosure and prepare for the preliminary hearing.
there was a discussion about the possibility of
defence counsel being available on may 26-28, 2025. ultimately, she was unable
to do so due to other court obligations. as such, her first available date was
august 11, 2025.  to clarify, there were no dates offered or could be offered
where defence counsel would have been available to conduct a preliminary
hearing or a trial after march 3, 2025.
the court granted the adjournment, commenting on
the concern about delay and mr. chow's failure to make his election. justice
crosbie agreed to manage the case and directed counsel to seek at least three
days for a preliminary hearing or trial, if necessary.
on march 5, 2025, the legal secretary from the defence
counsel’s office advised the crown that they would be setting a trial, but only
five days were required, not the original seven days.
in the march 5, 2025, tsf, the notice of
election was noted as having been received for the first time. only the defence
was not available for the dates offered by the court: june 9-12, 16-20, 25 or
july 7-11, 2025.
the trial was scheduled for the first available date for the defence, from
august 11 to 15, 2025. the tsf was silent as to whether any other earlier dates
were available. as such, it is presumed these were the only dates available to
the court.
on march 19, 2025, the parties returned before
justice crosbie to discuss how the case would proceed. defence counsel
indicated that there were four hours of video footage, which she had reviewed
with her client. additional disclosure was received just before the appearance.
however, defence counsel stated, “i can advise the court that mr. chow has, in
fact, made an election for a trial at the ontario court of justice because this
has now taken considerably longer than he anticipated, in light of the
inability for us to start the preliminary hearing on the last occasion.”
defence counsel advised that only five days were
needed, as she was prepared to work on admissions and agreed statements of
facts. further, she advised that there was a potential
carosella s. 7
application,
which could be heard in a blended
voir dire.
she was clear that the
application would not add to the five days. the crown stated he presumed the
defence was no longer bringing a section 10(b)
charter
application. in
response, defence counsel was silent, and it was assumed that a 10(b) application
was no longer contemplated for the trial.
in adjourning the matter to the updated
scheduled trial dates, august 11-15, 2025, justice crosbie advised the parties
that if anything were to come up or be anticipated to affect the trial or the
trial length, they are to address the matter before her or the jpt judge in
advance, since they had already lost three days of court time. justice crosbie warned
that if further dates were needed, they would likely be scheduled in september
2025, at the earliest.
there
was no further request to see justice crosbie or the jpt judge before filing
this 11(b) application on may 1, 2025.
analysis of delay
i)
defence’s unavailability for initial trial dates
when the matter was initially set down for
trial, the defence was not available between february 10-20, 2025. the crown
submitted that this should be deducted as defence delay.
i found that the crown completed its disclosure
for the preliminary hearing by the evening of february 25, 2025, while almost
complete disclosure was not provided until march 17, 2025.
given that the incident occurred in a parking
lot covered by various surveillance videos, i found that four hours of relevant
video footage were provided on february 25, which necessitated a thorough
review. however, i accepted that just under 14 hours of surveillance was
disclosed and would need, at a minimum, a cursory review.
the crown did not present any evidence on its
ability to disclose these videos earlier than february 25, 2025.
both crown and defence counsel on this matter
were in a murder trial that extended until february 23, 2025. while another
crown may have been assigned, it would have been unlikely to happen once the
murder trial they were in extended from the expected end date of february 7 to
february 23.
given these findings, i did not find that the
period between february 10 and 24, 2025, should be listed as defence delay,
since the crown would not have been in a position to proceed during this time.
ii)
intake period (february 27, 2024 – may 17, 2024)
for this period, i disagree with the crown’s
submission that the defence did not move to progress the matter forward, and
therefore, this time period should be distributed equally.
at times, it was the crown’s office that was inattentive
or incapable of fulfilling its duty to provide disclosure. initially, the applicant
had to follow up with the crown to have the matter proceed.
while the crown pointed to an opportunity for
the defence to ascertain who the assigned crown was, the crown was already
aware that ms. ghadia was counsel of record, given her presence at the bail
hearing and her letter and designation provided on february 7. while the crown
was not assigned initially, mr. wilson was assigned almost immediately after
the disclosure request, as outlined below:
•
on february 7, 2024, the defence requested
initial disclosure and filed a designation with the court.
•
on february 23, 2024, the crown’s office
responded that the matter had not been assigned and the defence should “check
back periodically.”
•
on february 26, 2024, michael wilson was assigned,
and a charge screening form was completed that day. it was not communicated to
the defence that a crown had been assigned.
•
on february 27, 2024, counsel for the defence
and crown counsel in court, gabriel ho, had a brief discussion.
without evidence from mr. ho or comments in the
transcript, the respondent assumes that the defence “would have been advised of
the name of the assigned crown at that time”. however, i could not make this
assumption due to the lack of evidence.
however, the respondent does not indicate why
mr. wilson or someone from the crown’s office did not reach out to the defence
to advise that he was the assigned crown. it is incumbent upon both parties to
take proactive steps to ensure timely disclosure, particularly when a request
has been made and an update is available. in this case, the crown should have
been proactive in reaching out to the defence, given that the update on the
assigned crown was made within 3 days of the request and was likely
precipitated by the disclosure request.
there is no merit to the suggestion that this
period of delay should be shared between the parties. however, it is appropriate
for the later period.
iii)
joint neglect of disclosure obligations (november
2024 – february 2025)
in
zahor
,
the court found that the
defence cannot be complacent in following up on disclosure and further found
that apportioning the delay due to complacency for both parties was not an
error. justice coroza quoted
r. v. dixon
,
at para
37
:
the fair and efficient functioning of the
criminal justice system requires that defence counsel exercise due diligence in
actively seeking and pursuing crown disclosure.  the very nature of the
disclosure process makes it prone to human error and vulnerable to attack.  as
officers of the court, defence counsel has an obligation to pursue disclosure
diligently.  when counsel becomes or ought to become aware, from other relevant
material produced by the crown, of a failure to disclose further material,
counsel must not remain passive.  rather, they must diligently pursue
disclosure.
i found that within the period after setting the
preliminary hearing date until both counsel concluded a homicide jury trial in
february 2025, days before the scheduled preliminary hearing, the defence was inattentive
in following up on their june 2024 disclosure request, and the crown was
similarly remiss in fulfilling its obligation regarding the outstanding
disclosure. both parties’ inaction led to the adjournment of the preliminary
hearing. the lack of follow-up is notable given the systems in place by both
offices.
a)
role of
administrative staff in delay
defence counsel employed two clerks, a law clerk
and a disclosure clerk, who request and organize the disclosure for her review.
the two clerks’ tasks allow her to prepare for a matter in only a few days. indeed,
the requests and details were always sent from her clerks. their jobs are vital,
given her demanding practice.
no explanation was provided regarding the
absence of follow-up by the clerks after receiving disclosure in the fall of
2024. the respondent’s record clarified the disclosure timeline, which was not
fully reflected in the applicant’s material, as the application’s materials did
not reference the disclosure received in fall 2024, which could have
contributed to an incomplete picture of the disclosure timeline.
considering the disclosure clerks’
responsibilities, it would be reasonable to expect that a follow-up request had
been initiated before the end of december 2024. this expectation is further
reinforced by the fact that, by that time, it was anticipated that both ms.
ghadia and mr. wilson would be engaged in a homicide jury trial from january 12
to february 7, 2025, leaving only a three-week window for trial preparation.
according to defence counsel’s submission, had
the disclosure been received five weeks earlier, her clerks would have prepared
a trial binder for her to review in preparation, leaving no reason for the
preliminary hearing to be delayed.
although it was not explained how the
outstanding disclosure was necessary to review in preparation for the
preliminary hearing, it contained some relevant information that ultimately
became the basis for most of the trial.
like the defence, the crown also has a legal
administrative assistant who was responsible for disclosure on her assigned criminal
files, which includes “requesting, processing and releasing disclosure to
counsel and/or accused persons”.
despite this obligation, there was no explanation why so many disclosure items were
not disclosed until february 25-27, 2025.
despite both parties having designated personnel
to manage disclosure, there was no activity between november 25, 2024 and
february 24, 2025. however, once ms. ghadia and mr. wilson realized the issue,
both were actively involved in having the disclosure provided to the defence. but
for the murder trial, the disclosure issue likely would not have been resolved
so close to the preliminary hearing date, as the lawyers were unaware that
their respective administrative staff had ceased to follow up on the
disclosure.
moreover, the parties were directed by the jpt
judge to address any disclosure issues in advance of the hearing; this was not
done, nor is there evidence that it was brought to the attention of the lawyers
until february 24, 2025.
as such, i found that between mid-december 2024
and february 23, 2025, the delay due to inactivity should be split among the
parties, due to inaction by the administrative staff, who are an extension of
the defence and crown.
given that both crown and defence counsel rely
on administrative staff to manage disclosure and scheduling, their inaction
must be treated as an extension of counsel’s conduct. the failure to follow up
on outstanding disclosure between november 2024 and february 2025 reflects a
systemic lapse in diligence, not merely clerical oversight.
the absence of follow-up by administrative staff,
despite known outstanding items and a narrowing trial window, constitutes a
failure of diligence. this failure contributed directly to the adjournment of
the preliminary hearing and undermined the efficient use of court resources;
therefore, it must be taken into account when attributing delay.
as such, i found that between mid-december 2024
and february 23, 2025, the delay caused by a lack of attention should be split
among the parties. as it should have been apparent to the administrative staff,
pertinent disclosure remained outstanding for at least three weeks after the
last batch of disclosure and before the end of the year.
iv)
other defence actions
a)
failure to elect and procedural consequences
in
jordan
,
the court accepted that
accused persons may re-elect to proceed from a superior court trial to a
provincial court trial for legitimate purposes, whether before or during their preliminary
hearing. anticipating that the preliminary hearing would only be scheduled upon
the election of the accused, the court indicated the 30-month ceiling would
apply. furthermore, it would be open for the crown to consent in exchange for
the accused person waiving delay.
in this case, the 30-month ceiling does not
apply, since the defence failed to comply with the agreement to make an
election, and the court and the crown also failed to secure that election by
the time the preliminary hearing was scheduled.
the supreme court also understood that it makes
sense for the accused person not to lock themselves into a decision that would
require the crown to consent, and for which the crown can refuse without
providing reasons.
however, reserving the election is usually a
transparent activity, in that the crown and the court are not relying on
unconfirmed assurances. however, even when an accused transparently reserves
their election regarding the mode of trial, the supreme court has acknowledged
that such practices can contribute to delays in the court process and suggested
that “it might be appropriate to reconsider the prudence of this approach.”
in
albetar c. r.
, the quebec superior court
observed that the court of appeal in
lapointe c. r.
took no issue with the judge characterizing a significant portion of the
months prior to the election as defence delay, noting the defence could not
“remain silent and so substantially alter the pace of a case that was
proceeding normally, without clearly expressing his concern about the delays
that would reach the new presumed ceiling applicable in four months.”
mr. chow changed his mind twice about whether he
was electing for a trial in the ocj or a trial in the scj with a preliminary
hearing on the eligible offences. while the initial change had no significant
consequence, i found that the updated choice had a significant impact on the
matter and considerations in delay.
notably, mr. chow signed his notice of election
for an ocj trial two days before the preliminary hearing was to commence. the
request for an adjournment included the possibility of the updated intention to
elect ocj, but there was no indication of mr. chow’s signed direction. furthermore,
no explanation was provided regarding the timing of the notice of election’s
signing and its delayed filing.
while the defence expressed concern about
delay, there was no notice to the court or the crown that he would be bringing
this application. further, the defence’s decision to silently reserve his election
was inconsistent with prior assurances to the jpt judge, the court, through the
trial coordinator and contravened direction from the court, ocj practice
directions and the
code
.
in considering the defence’s action or delayed
action, i found that the defence did the following:
(1)
failed to canvass this 11(b) application at the jpt,
contrary to item 3 of the november 1, 2023
ontario court of justice practice direction: section 11(b)
charter
applications
and at the directions of the jpt
judge, as noted in the july 9 and august 28, 2024 jpt forms;
(2)
failed to schedule this 11(b) application at
least four months in advance of trial, contravening item 2 of the november 1,
2023
practice direction
;
(3)
failed to advise that there remained issues regarding
the outstanding disclosure before february 24, 2025, despite the direction of
the jpt judge, as noted in the july 9 and august 28, 2024 jpt forms;
(4)
failed to elect as soon as practicable, as
agreed upon in the initial jpt, as noted in the july 9, 2024 jpt form;
(5)
failed to elect by the end of october 2024, as
agreed upon in the second jpt, as noted in the august 28, 2024 jpt form;
(6)
failed to elect on september 17, 2024, as noted
in the september 12, 2024 trial scheduling form (tsf) and contrary to item 1(c)
of the may 8, 2023
practice direction: procedure for scheduling of criminal trials and
preliminary inquiries
;
(7)
failed to file a statement of issues by the end
of october 2024 or ever, as prescribed in
section
536.3
of the
criminal code
,
rule 4.3(3)
of the ontario court justice
criminal rules,
and as directed and noted on the jpt form, dated august
28, 2024; and
(8)
failed to inform the court or the crown that mr.
chow signed a written notice of election to be tried in the ontario court of
justice when addressing the court on february 27 and march 3, 2025. the first
time the court was told of mr. chow’s election was on march 19, 2025.
the defence’s decision to reserve its election
without notification contributed to procedural delays, which meant that some of
the delay is attributable to them, particularly for the period after the
election for trial was directed by mr. chow until it was filed with the court.
i did not allocate days prior to february 25,
2025, as there was an issue with the disclosure; therefore, the defence is not
solely responsible for the delay.
even if the calculation were not considered
defence delay, the delayed defence election would be an exceptional
circumstance as the silent reservation of the election prevented the crown from
expediting the process to meet the fresh 18-month
jordan
guideline,
which was only four months away, once it came to the crown’s attention.
while the crown could have inquired earlier
about the status of the election, the crown rightly relied on the assurances of
the defence that the election was to be made imminently.  this can reasonably be
seen as an event that was unforeseeable to the crown, as required in the first
part of the
jordan
exceptional test.
the next part of the inquiry is whether the crown
took reasonable steps to mitigate the delay, even if they were not successful.
in this case, once the crown
realized that the matter would proceed as an ocj trial, he attempted to secure
earlier dates without success due to the defence's unavailability.
that said,
jordan
noted that an exceptional circumstance
was either reasonably unforeseeable
or
unavoidable.  in this case, although
it was unforeseeable, it was certainly avoidable.  neither the court nor the
crown confirmed the accused’s election at the time the hearing was scheduled.
as a matter of best practice, elections by the crown and the
defence should be made either prior to the jpt or immediately thereafter.
moreover, a trial or preliminary hearing should not be confirmed on the record
until both the crown and the defence have made their respective
elections—either orally in court or in writing.
a preliminary hearing should not be scheduled without a statement
of issues; this ought to be the exception, not the norm. adopting this practice
may reduce procedural uncertainty associated with unconfirmed elections and
promote a more efficient use of court resources.
b)
defence not available for offered dates
the final issue is the lack of availability for
the dates offered by the trial coordinator for the trial, following the defence
election. the defence was offered three series of dates over a 32-day period in
june and july 2025. as stated, the defence was not available for any of these
dates or any date until august 11, 2025, due to previously scheduled court hearings
and vacation.
in
godin
,
the supreme court held that the defence is not
required to be in a state of perpetual availability and found it unreasonable
to hold the defence responsible for being unavailable on a single available
date.
however, the court of appeal in
r. v. albinowski
found that when counsel
rejects multiple dates that are unavailable due to previously scheduled
professional commitments, the periods of unavailability are not related to
legitimate defence actions; as such, the periods count against the defence.
the principle applies equally
when the crown is not available for multiple dates in an extended period.
defence counsel’s unavailability was due to matters unrelated to the
applicant’s case and extended beyond a single date or set of dates offered.
furthermore, i found that the defence was not available for any date
for a preliminary hearing or trial from march 25 to august 11, 2025, as counsel
was scheduled on other matters. relying on
albinowski
, this
unavailability means that delay would be attributable to the defence.
calculation of delay
in calculating the periods of delay attributable solely to the
defence, i found 59 days based on the following:
•
the specific dates between june 9 and 25. 2025,
when the court was available, (10 days) and july 7-11 (5 days) are considered
defence delay for a total of 15 days.
•
for the period of delay attributed by failing to
notify the court and promptly schedule a trial upon the election to the ocj, as
instructed, i found february 25 -march 5, 2025 (9 days) as defence delay.
•
finally, the defence and the crown were not
diligent in pursuing disclosure in the winter of 2024/2025 until february 24. as
such, the lack of activity by both parties between december 16, 2024 and
february 24, 2025, will be divided equally, that is, 70 days in total allocated
as 35 days each for the defence and the crown.
conclusion and disposition
in applying the legal framework established in
r. v. jordan
, the
following was determined:
•
total delay: the period from the date of charge
(january 11, 2024) to the end of the scheduled trial (august 15, 2025) was 582
days, or 19.1 months.
•
defence delay: 59 days were attributable solely
to the defence, including:
o
15 days due to unavailability for earlier trial dates, after the
election,
o
9 days due to the delay in filing the election after mr. chow signed
it, and
o
35 days due to joint neglect in disclosure follow-up, apportioned
equally.
•
net delay: after deducting defence delay, the
net delay is 523 days, or 17.2 months, which is below the 18-month presumptive
ceiling for trials in the ontario court of justice.
alternatively, even if the defence’s silent reservation of its
election does not amount to defence delay, it qualifies as a discrete
exceptional circumstance, as it was unforeseeable by the crown. the crown took
reasonable steps to mitigate the delay once the election was clarified, but was
unable to proceed due to the defence counsel’s unavailability.
accordingly, the delay was not presumptively unreasonable and the
application for a stay under section 11(b) of the
charter
was dismissed.
oral reasons released:  july 29, 2025
revised written reasons
released:  august 28
, 2025
signed:
justice lori anne thomas
chronology of events
date
event
jan 11, 2024
mr. chow charged;
ms. ghadia noted as counsel
jan 18, 2024
mr. chow was released
on recognizance
feb  7, 2024
defence requested
disclosure and filed a designation with ms. ghadia as counsel
feb 23, 2024
crown’s office
responded and directed defence to follow up, as a crown was not assigned
feb 26, 2024
michael wilson is
assigned as the crown
feb 27, 2024
1
st
appearance after bail; adjourned to april 23 for disclosure and cpt
apr 23, 2024
2
nd
appearance after bail; no initial disclosure; adjourned to june 4
apr 29, 2024
initial disclosure
provided
may 17, 2024
substantial
disclosure provided
jun 4, 2024
3
rd
appearance post-bail; cpt scheduled for june 18
jun 18, 2024
crown missed the
scheduled cpt, but parties set jpt
jun 19, 2024
defence sent a
detailed disclosure request
jul 2, 2024
substantial
disclosure on usb provided
jul 9, 2024
jpt for trial held
jul 10, 2024
trial scheduled:
feb 24-mar 4, 2025
jul 16, 2024
defence informed
that he wanted a preliminary inquiry, which was confirmed in court; trial
coordinator advised to get approval from a judge in jicmc; not done
aug 6, 2024
parties advised the
court that a 2
nd
jpt needed to be scheduled
aug 28, 2024
2
nd
jpt
– for preliminary hearing
sep 5, 2024
further disclosure
provided
sep 10, 2024
court appearance:
defence advised that they were waiting on the crown to respond for trial
scheduling
sep 12, 2024
preliminary inquiry
scheduled: feb 27-mar 4, 2025
sep 17, 2024
preliminary inquiry
hearing dates noted on the record
oct 11, 17 &
25, 2024
further disclosure
provided
oct 31, 2024
date noted for
defence to file notice of election
nov 25, 2024
further disclosure
provided
jan 13 – feb 23,
2025
counsel involved in
unrelated homicide trial
feb 24, 2025
defence requested
the remaining outstanding disclosure
feb 24-27, 2025
crown disclosed
relevant disclosure available
feb 25, 2025
mr. chow signed a
notice of election for trial, but it was not filed
feb 27, 2025
defence requested an
adjournment of preliminary inquiry; adjourned to march 3; first time the
court noted that the defence election was outstanding
mar 3, 2025
defence adjournment
granted
mar 5, 2025
defence advised the
crown that the election will be an ocj trial; scheduled: aug 11-14, 2025
mar 19, 2025
trial and election
noted on the record; disclosure was essentially complete
may 1, 2025
11(b) application
filed
may 30, 2025
11(b) respondent
materials filed
jun 13, 2025
application heard,
but reserved for further evidence
jun 18, 2025
further applicant
affidavit filed
jul 4, 2025
further respondent
affidavit filed
jul 7, 2025
final applicant
affidavit filed, dated july 4, but received july 7
jul 29, 2025
oral reasons given
582 days ÷ 30.417 = 19.1 months, as per
r. v. shaikh
,
2019
onca 895
, endnote 2.
r. v. varennes
,
2025 scc 22
, at para
126
r. v. jordan
, supra,
at paras
61-65, 113, and 121
; see also
r.
v. cody
,
2017 scc 31
, at paras
28-35
jordan
, supra,
at para
69
a chronology of events prepared by the court is included as an appendix to this
decision.
the crown did not question or dispute ms. seymour’s statement of
about four requests, but the applicant did not file these requests. given ms.
seymour’s departure and her status as an officer of the court, i accept that
the requests were made. whether or not the requests were made does not impact
the application.
the july 10, 2024 trial scheduling form (tsf) notes the defence was
not available for “feb 10-28, 2025”. however, given that the trial was
scheduled, i found that the defence was available from february 24, 2025, to
march 4, 2025.
justice crosbie was not sitting in her present role as the local administrative
judge. however, she was a judicial lead. as such, she would have been aware of
the flexibility to accommodate the parties' schedules.
the tsf was silent as to whether any other earlier dates were
available. as such, even though the trial coordinator provided the first date, the
defence indicated they were available; it is presumed that only these periods
noted were available for the court.
transcript of proceedings, march 19, 2025, p. 2
at the time of the oral reasons, the defence did not bring a
section 10(b) application. by the time written reasons were provided, the trial
concluded, and no section 10(b) application was brought.
1998 canlii 805 (scc)
; scr 244, at para 37; see
r.
v. zahor
,
2022 onca 449
, at para
99
see the affidavit dated july 4, 2025. the affidavit dated may 1,
2025, at paras 3 and 8, only noted disclosure as of april 29. in the
applicant’s factum, at para 13, it is stated that the crown indicated
disclosure would be available on may 17, 2024; this appears to be confirmed in
the email correspondence.
affidavit dated may 30, 2025, respondent application record, tab 4
there were some issues with earlier items of disclosure that were received,
but the affidavit is silent as to what changed suddenly in february 2025. further,
the oic’s will-say, at tab 6, did not provide any insight into what occurred with
the disclosure after september 2024.
r. v. jordan
,
2016 scc 27
at para
62
and endnote 3
r. v.
archambault,
2024 scc 35
, at paras
54 and 142
archambault
, supra,
at para
97
2024 qccq 5641
, at paras
136-137
; see also
lapointe c. r.
,
2021
qcca 152
jordan
, supra,
at para
73
ibid,
at paras 69-70
godin
, supra,
at para
23
2018 onca 1084
, at para.
33
r.
v. picard
,
2017 onca 692
, at para
113