ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.p.,
2025 oncj 167
date:
2025 03 27
court
file no.:  pembroke 23-37100837
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jp
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on march 3, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 27, 2025
goher irfan........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
adrian cleaver................................................................................. counsel
for the accused
richardson j.:
introduction
the issue in this case is the appropriate
sentence for a 31-year-old man who sexually interfered with a vulnerable
fourteen-year-old indigenous, autistic child who was under the influence of
alcohol, cannabis and xanax, the latter of which was provided to the
complainant by the offender.
facts
on december 9, 2024, following a trial that
spanned over parts or all of five days, i found jp guilty of one count of sexual
interference and one count of sexual assault.  i found the accused not guilty
of one count of administering a noxious substance.
i issued written reasons for my findings on
january 20, 2025.  those reasons are reported at
r. v. jp
2025 oncj 36
.
i summarize my findings at trial as follows:
a)
i did not believe the accused, who testified in his own defence.
nor was i left in doubt with respect to his evidence.
b)
jp, who was 31 years of age at the time of the incident, met “two
kids” at the dairy queen in pembroke the evening of july 17, 2023.  they
invited him to attend a party at a house on eganville road.
c)
kj, who was 14 years of age at the time of the incident, knew about
the party on eganville road and wanted to attend.  her mother, cc, did not want
her to attend.  kj went anyway.
d)
kj met jp at the party.
e)
everyone at the party, other than jp, was between 14 and 18 years of
age.
f)
everyone left the party because the police
attended and shut it down.
g)
kj was very intoxicated at the party.
h)
kj and jp and some of the other people from the party went to the
pembroke marina.  kj was stumbling and slurring her words at the marina.  she
also fell.
i)
one of kj’s friends, lp, told kj that she should
not leave the party with jp.  kj rebuffed this suggestion.  lp also told jp
that he should not walk kj home and that someone her own age should walk her
home.
j)
kj did not want to go home because she was
afraid that cc would be angry. she was afraid cc would get rid of her cat.
k)
instead, she walked with jp to a motel where he was staying on
pembroke street east.
l)
kj was still very intoxicated as she walked to
the motel.
m)
kj consumed some xanax while she was at the motel.  jp supplied her
with the xanax.  he had it lawfully pursuant to a prescription.  she took the
xanax voluntarily.
n)
kj consented to joining jp in bed.  she consented to him kissing her
and touching her.
o)
kj’s arms and legs began to feel heavy and she did not feel good.
this was likely the result of her consumption of alcohol, xanax and marihuana,
which was also on hand and which, at some point in the evening, they also
consumed.
p)
jp proceeded to have sexual intercourse with kj.
q)
kj did not consent to the sexual intercourse.  the issue of consent
is important because jp raised the defence of mistake of age.
r)
i also found that jp did not take reasonable
steps to ensure that kj was consenting to sexual intercourse.
s)
at some point during the evening, jp told kj that he had been in the
military and had a 13-year-old son.
t)
jp gave her his name and contact information.
u)
kj took photos of jp sitting at a table in the motel room.  she took
the photos because she believed that something was not right and she needed to
have a form of proof that she was with jp.
v)
in the morning, jp’s mother drove kj to a tim horton’s in the west
end of pembroke, not far from where she lived.
w)
she went to bed and slept around the clock until she told cc what
happened by text message almost 24 hours later.
x)
i found that although kj was grossly intoxicated, she was not so
intoxicated that she was incapable of consenting to sexual intercourse.
y)
following the rubric in
r. v. hason
2024 onca 369
, i found
that:
i)
the crown failed to disprove that jp
subjectively believed that kj was 16 years of age or older.
ii)
jp was reckless with respect to whether kj was
16 years of age or older.  he was in possession of information that should have
led him to question her more thoroughly about her age.  he chose to ignore that
information and take the risk.
i agree with the parties that the sexual assault
charge is to be judicially stayed pursuant to the principles in
r. v.
kienapple
1974 canlii 14 (scc)
.
i ordered the completion of a pre-sentence
report and ordered the matter on for sentencing on march 3, 2025.
on march 3, 2025, jp did not attend for the
sentencing hearing and i issued a warrant for his arrest.  he was found by
police within a very short while of the issuance of the warrant.   we were able
to complete the sentencing submissions on march 3, 2025.  i remanded jp into
custody pending sentencing.
on march 3, 2025, jp entered a plea to one count
of failing to appear.  i was told that jp was on bail on other charges.  he was
required to wear a gps monitoring device.  police received an alert that he had
tampered with the gps device at 8:53 am.  police found the gps monitoring
device behind the shoppers drug mart in pembroke.  jp had cut it off his
person.
counsel advised that there is a joint submission
for 30 days concurrent to the sentence that i ultimately will impose with
respect to the sexual interference.
the parties disagree on the appropriate sentence
for the sexual interference.  crown counsel seeks a sentence of five years in
the penitentiary.  defence counsel seeks a sentence of between three and four
years in the penitentiary.
the criminal record
jp has a criminal record in the united states
which includes the following convictions:
a)
wrongful possession of a spice;
b)
disorderly conduct (two counts);
c)
possession of a controlled substance (three counts);
d)
larceny (two counts);
e)
probation violation; and
f)
use motor vehicle without permission.
some of the american convictions occurred while
jp was a member of the united states military.  others occurred while he was
living in connecticut.   the convictions were registered between 2012 and
2019.   it appears as though he received a year in jail for his last american
conviction.
he also has a record in canada for the following
offences:
a)
take motor vehicle without consent;
b)
mischief under $5000;
c)
theft under $5000 (three counts).
these convictions were registered in pembroke on
march 12, 2024.  he received a sentence of 39 days on top of 14 days served (21
days credit) and probation for 18 months.
the pre-sentence report
jp was born and spent his early childhood in
newfoundland.  his father worked for the military.  he was subjected to
domestic violence between his parents when he was young.  his father misused
alcohol and cannabis.
when jp was six, his mother ended the
relationship with his father and relocated herself and jp to the united
states.  his mother started a new relationship.  her new partner had three boys
and a girl from a previous relationship.  jp was not close with his
step-siblings.
jp has not seen his father since he left
newfoundland.  he last spoke with him over a decade ago.
between the ages of six and 31, jp resided in the
united states.
jp recalled that his step-father was a heavy
drinker.
jp completed high school in the united states.
he also completed college courses.  he was studying to be an addictions
counsellor.
he worked in warehouses for a few years.  he was
a member of the united states military for three years.  he took a discharge
rather than being court martialed for criminal charges.
he moved back to canada with his mother after
her relationship with his step-father broke down.  they moved to pembroke
because his aunt (his mother’s sister) lives here.
jp had a relationship with a woman when he was
17 which resulted in the birth of his son.   he communicates with his son, now
14, through video call.  he had one other relationship with a woman in canada.
he is not presently in a relationship.  he denied casual dating.
jp has a substance abuse problem.  his mother
says he is a “really nice boy when he is sober”.  she did not want to discuss
jp’s drug problem with the author of the psr because she found it too
stressful.  he may have diagnoses of anxiety and depression and bi-polar
disorder.  she reported that the only thing that jp finds helpful in managing
his mental health is cannabis.  although jp told his mother that he has seen a
local psychiatrist, he denies it.
jp denies use of alcohol.  he began using
cannabis when he was 15.  while he was in the united states military, he became
addicted to heroin.  he also occasionally used cocaine. once he moved to
pembroke, he started using fentanyl.  he reports having overdosed approximately
30 times and he has had multiple trips to the hospital.  this was confirmed by
the arresting officer, who recalls having to administer naloxone to jp when he
overdosed.
he told the author of the pre-sentence report
that he was homeless and addicted to drugs.  he admitted to stealing to get
money for food and drugs.
he went to treatment for his drug problem in
2019.  he lived in a sober living home.  he stated that he was on the methadone
program.  he stated that he stopped using methadone because of incarceration in
march 2024.  he went to a treatment program in ottawa for a month.  he stopped
attending because he did not have transportation to pembroke and he did not want
to miss court.
he did not complete aftercare, nor did he follow
his probation officer’s recommendation to continue treatment.
jp apparently worked in pembroke at a warehouse
and for a company that changes oil.  he last worked two years ago.
like many homeless people in pembroke and
ontario, jp lived in a tent.  he reported that his mental health suffered
significantly while he was living in a tent.  he also went through a period
where his drug use was very heavy.   he reported that his friends and
neighbours in tents were also using drugs.
he now gets by on social assistance benefits he
receives from ontario works.  his application for ontario disability support
plan was denied.  he collects bottles for cash.
jp maintains his innocence as is his right.  he
maintains that he believed that kj was twenty years old and that their
encounter was consensual.  he also stated that he had consumed substances at
the time the offence was committed.
jp was not entirely cooperative with the author
of his psr.  he did not believe there was much merit to the process because he
expects to be incarcerated.
jp’s probation officer encouraged him to attend
alcoholics anonymous and narcotics anonymous but he did not follow through.
she also referred him to a counselling program called connections and he did
not attend.  she directed him to attend addictions counselling but he declined
because he believed he was going to jail.  he states that counselling does not
work for him.
the victim impact statements
both kj and cc completed victim impact
statements.
kj reported that:
a)
she is now 16 years of age.
b)
before the offence she was an outgoing and active teenager.  she now
feels like a prisoner.
c)
as a result of the offence her life has changed in the most devastating
way.
d)
she has had difficulty attending school.
e)
she has triggers which cause depression, anxiety and fear.
f)
she is afraid to leave her home.  she feels like
she is dying and cannot breathe.
g)
she does not trust anyone anymore.
h)
she has a hard time sleeping and she suffers from nightmares.
i)
she has gained a lot of weight due to unhealthy
eating patterns.
j)
she is afraid to go to the mall or the gym.
k)
she has used drugs and alcohol.
l)
she has had periods when she does not care about
herself and has wanted to die.
m)
she has got in trouble with the law herself, is on probation and has
a criminal record.
n)
her mom has been put under financial strain ensuring that she
attends for counselling and treatment.
nonetheless, she is optimistic that with her
mom’s support, resources and her culture (kj is an indigenous woman), she will
return to her former self.
i note that when the offence was committed, kj
was in a state of heightened vulnerability due to the following factors:
a)
she is an indigenous person;
b)
she is “on the spectrum” for autism disorder;
c)
she was inexperienced with alcohol but eager to use it to excess;
d)
she was experienced in the use of marihuana and supplied the
marihuana which she and jp consumed; and
e)
she was eager to experiment with other drugs which is why she
voluntarily consumed the xanax which jp offered her.
cc reported that:
a)
she suffers anxiety which overtakes her body and feels like a heart
attack when she sees someone who resembles jp.
b)
recalling that she learned about what happened to her daughter by
text message, she now panics whenever she hears her phone “ping”.
c)
she struggles financially to support kj’s counselling and treatment.
d)
she has difficulty sleeping and suffers nightmares.
e)
she describes how she feels as a “life sentence”.
f)
she despairs at how her daughter has changed because
of the offences.
jp’s address to the court
when i asked jp if he had anything to say, he
told me that he is “not a monster” and he is a “kind, loving person”.
analysis
criminal code sentencing provisions
section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
a)
to denounce unlawful conduct in the harm done to victims or to the
community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
b)
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
and
f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.
section 718.01 sets out the following sentencing
objectives when dealing with offences against children:
when a court
imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a child under the
age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
establishes the fundamental principle of sentencing: “a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.”
section 718.2
of the
criminal code
sets
out “other sentencing principles”:
a
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence
that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race,
national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or
physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, or
on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence
that the offender involved a person under the age of 18 years in the commission
of the offence,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
(iii.2)
evidence
that the offence was committed against a person who, in the performance of
their duties and functions, was providing health services, including personal
care services,
(iv)
evidence
that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence
that the offence was committed while the offender was subject to a conditional
sentence order made under section 742.1 or released on parole, statutory
release or unescorted temporary absence under the
corrections and
conditional release act,
and
(vii)
evidence
that the commission of the offence had the effect of impeding another person
from obtaining health services, including personal care services,
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances;
(b)
a sentence should be similar to sentences
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances;
(c)
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty,
if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
assessment
of jp
jp is a lost soul.  he has not had a
relationship with his father since he was six.  he did not enjoy a positive
relationship with his step-father or his step-siblings.  he was subjected to
the use of alcohol, drugs and domestic violence when he was growing up.  his
only real support is his mother.  he has a child of his own that he sees by
chat video.
he developed an addiction to heroin, and once he
returned to canada, fentanyl.
although he acknowledges the toll that it has
taken on him with respect to his mental health and addiction, he seems content
to live in a tent and use drugs.
he is not interested in any measures that will
deal with his addiction.  he does not believe that counselling works.
he obviously has a mental health problem.  he
was prescribed xanax for anxiety at the time of the offence.  he does not seem
interested in pursuing treatment and counselling for that.
unless he has a change of heart while he is in
custody, i find that he will be challenging to engage in treatment.
there is very little in mitigation here.   he
did not enter a guilty plea.  he does not express any remorse.  these are not aggravating
features, but he is not entitled to the mitigation that a guilty plea and
expression of remorse would bring.
he lacks insight.
the offence has caused significant harm to kj
who is a vulnerable indigenous young person with autism.  having said that,
there is no evidence that jp was aware of kj’s indigeneity or her autism on
july 17 and 18, 2023.
there is a significant age difference between jp
and kj.  he was over twice her age when the offence was committed.  that is a
significant aggravating factor.
the
sexual interference of kj involved sexual intercourse.  this is a
significant violation of her sexual integrity and is aggravating.
although
i found that kj’s level of intoxication was not sufficient to keep her from
legally consenting to sex, i have no doubt that jp took advantage of kj’s
vulnerability due to her use of alcohol, and cannabis on the evening in
question.  despite this, he also supplied her with xanax, which she took
voluntarily.  although i have not found him guilty of administering a noxious
substance, supplying her with this drug prior to having sex with her is
aggravating.
i
have no evidence concerning the risk that jp will pose to the community and his
need for sexual offending behaviour treatment. this is something that will have
to be considered by the correctional service of canada.
the cardinal principle of
sentencing is proportionality
in
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
, the supreme court of canada determined that
the “cardinal principle” of sentencing law is the principle of proportionality;
that is, the more serious the crime and the greater the degree of
responsibility, the more severe the sentence will be.  this must be balanced
against the moral blameworthiness of the offender.
lacasse
also
describes sentencing as a “delicate task”.  other cases have established
the principle that sentencing is a highly individualized process.
sentencing for sexual
offences against children
in
r.
v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
, at paragraph
5
, the supreme court of
canada made it clear that the law of sentencing with respect to sexual offences
against children must change:
we send a strong message that
sexual offences against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit
children’s vulnerability and cause profound harm to children, families and
communities.  sentences for these crimes must increase.  courts must
impose sentences that are proportional to the gravity of sexual offences against
children and the degree of responsibility of the offender, as informed by
parliament’s sentencing initiatives and by society’s deepened understanding of
the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against children.
sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness of sexual violence against
children and the far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children,
families and society at large.
at
paragraph 114, the court provided further guidance:
the message is that mid-single
digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children are normal and
that upper single-digit and double-digit penitentiary terms should be neither
unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances.  we would add
that substantial sentences can be imposed where there was only a single
instance of sexual violence and/or a single victim.
adolescent girls are disproportionately
victimized by sexual violence
in
the case before me, kj was an adolescent girl at the age of 14, indigenous,
autistic and extremely vulnerable.  in
friesen
,
at paragraph
136
, the
supreme court of canada cautioned sentencing judges in cases involving victims
who are adolescent girls:
….courts
must also be particularly careful to impose proportionate sentences in cases
where the victim is an adolescent. historically, disproportionately low
sentences have been imposed in these cases, particularly in cases involving
adolescent girls, even though adolescents may be an age group that is
disproportionately victimized by sexual violence (benedet, at pp. 302, 304 and
314;
l. (d.o.)
, at pp. 464-65, per l’heureux-dubé j.). in
particular, sexual violence by adult men against adolescent girls is associated
with higher rates of physical injury, suicide, substance abuse, and unwanted
pregnancy (i. grant and j. benedet, “confronting the sexual assault of teenage
girls: the mistake of age defence in canadian sexual assault law” (2019),
97
can. bar rev.
1, at p. 5; “the ‘statutory rape’ myth”, at
p. 269;
r. v.
hess
,
1990 canlii 89 (scc)
,
2 s.c.r. 906
, at pp. 948-49
, per
mclachlin j.).
just
how disproportionately affected are adolescent girls?
professor
grant recently stated:
sexual assault is gendered
across all ages and especially so in adolescence. one study found that under
the age of 11 girls experience sexual violence at a rate almost triple that of
boys; for girls between the ages of 12 and 17, that rate jumps to nine times
higher than for boys.  indigenous girls, girls with disabilities, and girls in
state care are particularly vulnerable to sexual violence.  furthermore, sexual
assault against boys peaks at a younger age than for girls.  specifically,
sexual abuse against boys peaks under the age of 12, whereas for girls sexual
abuse peaks around the age of 14, just where the mistake of age defence might
be more plausible.
see, i. grant, “the slow death
of the reasonable steps requirement for the mistake of age defence”,
44 manitoba
law journal 4
at pages 3-4.
sentencing precedents from cases which
are factually similar
the
closest case to the facts before me is
r. v. audet,
2020 onsc 5039
, a
decision of justice c.m. smith of the superior court of justice.  in
audet
,
the
complainant was 15.  she met the offender at the apartment of a friend.  the
sexual interference took place on their second meeting.  he came at her and
started kissing her.  she attempted to resist by stating “no” and trying to
push him away.  he fingered her.  she again resisted.  he then took her to the
bathroom and had vaginal intercourse with her.
the
offender proceeded to trial and relied upon, among other things, the defences
of consent and honest but mistaken belief about the age of the complainant.
justice smith rejected his evidence and found him guilty.
the
offender had a very troubled youth.  his mother was a sex trade worker and as a
child he was abused by her clientele.  he managed to complete his grade 12 and
some post-secondary education.  he had a criminal record which justice smith
described as “becoming lengthy”, but which primarily had convictions for
breaches and assaults.  his longest pre-offence custodial sentence was 120
days.  he used marihuana and alcohol regularly from the age of 12.  he made
light of the rehabilitation process to the author of his pre-sentence report,
describing the court-ordered partner assault response program for one of his
previous convictions as “stupid”.  justice smith concluded that “the prospects
for successful rehabilitation in this matter are bleak.”
justice
smith sentenced the offender to four years.
another
case that is closer on its facts to the case before me is
r. v. c.p.,
2023
onca 70
.  i do not have the benefit of the trial judgment of justice libman.
there is, however, a brief recitation of facts in the court of appeal’s
judgment.
the
14-year-old complainant skipped class and went to the toronto eaton centre.
while there she texted the accused, who was 35, with whom she had had a “prior
interaction” and arranged to go to his house.  there, he gave her ketamine,
touched her with his hands, digitally penetrated her, had intercourse with her
and put his penis in her mouth.  she consented to all of the sexual acts except
fellatio.  he gave her mdma after the sex.  he told her that he had an
eight-year old daughter and revealed that he was “30 something” years of age.
she was “taken aback” by this and told him that she was 14.  he appeared
surprised and called a cab for her to go home.  justice libman convicted and
imposed a four and a half-year sentence.  this was undisturbed on appeal which
concerned justice libman’s application of the “mistake of age” defence.
in
r. v. d.f.,
2024 onsc 4621
, justice tzimas dealt with the case of a 36-year-old
offender who had sexual intercourse on two occasions with the 14-year-old
daughter of his landlord.  prior to the sexual offences, the offender developed
a relationship with the complainant as her “smoking buddy” for cigarettes and
weed.  the complainant was described as “troubled”.  she had been drinking to
excess in the first instance of sexual intercourse.  she had a difficult
relationship with her mother and the offender knew that she had a history of
running away from home.  the offender had a criminal record with 15 prior
dispositions including convictions for robbery, domestic violence, possession
of an unauthorized firearm and breaches.  he had a dismal record of complying
with court-ordered counselling.  he was the victim of sexual abuse as a child.
in the pre-sentence report, the probation officer indicated that the offender
accepted responsibility for the offence but demonstrated limited insight into
his behaviour.
justice
tzimas sentenced the accused to five and half years in the penitentiary.  she
noted that he had a “blatant disregard for this troubled 14-year-old” (at
paragraph 68b).  she also stated at paragraph 68h:
although
i hesitate to describe the relationship between d.f. and the complaint as
trust-like, or that d.f. engaged in grooming in the conventional sense of that
term, he was also not an arms-length tenant minding his own business. there is
no doubt that d.f. cultivated and promoted a friendly relationship with the
complainant and her family. he worked on breaking down the barriers between him
and the 14-year-old complainant by demonstrating concern for the complainant’s
injured foot, questioning her about wanting to smoke a cigarette, and then
becoming her smoking buddy. d.f. shared food with the family, and he interacted
with the complainant and her brothers from time to time. through his actions,
d.f. encouraged the complainant and her mother to trust him. in a very short
period of time, d.f. went from a casual conversation about the complainant’s
foot when she was sitting on the porch, to inviting the complainant to watch a
movie together while smoking, and then having sexual intercourse. d.f. took
advantage of the friendly and neighbourly disposition by both the complainant
and her mother.
the
crown urged me to find that the relationship between jp and kj was similar to
that in
df
putting jp’s crime on par with df’s
.
i agree with
defence counsel that there are some significant differences between this case
and
df,
including:
a)
jp and kj met
the night of the incident.  although jp offered his home to kj on the night in
question, there was no prior trust-building between them over a lengthier
period as there was in
df.
b)
df knew that his
victim was “troubled”.
c)
df knew that his
victim was 14.
d)
there was one
instance of sexual intercourse between jp and kj, not two.
e)
jp’s criminal
record is less serious.
f)
df had
significant prior “difficulties in his relationships with women” (paragraph
68g), which do not appear to be present in jp’s case.
on
the other hand, df presented a brighter outlook for rehabilitation than i find
is the case for jp.  df also had the benefit of other mitigating factors in
play, including:
a)
he has the
ability to hold employment.
b)
he did not have
addiction issues.
c)
he has some
mental health issues arising from being sexually abused himself as a child.
d)
although he
maintained his innocence and was found guilty after trial, he was remorseful
and accepted the court’s finding of responsibility for his offence.
e)
df was a black
man, but he was not able to obtain a
morris
report.
i
agree that like df, jp knew that kj was afraid to go home to her mother.  he
knew that she was under the influence of alcohol, and later, marihuana.  he
gave her xanax.  he took advantage of her vulnerability which is extremely
aggravating.
for
all of these reasons, i find that the appropriate sentence in this case is five
years in the penitentiary.
pursuant
to
section 109
of the
criminal code
,
i will make a ten-year firearm
prohibition order against jp.
pursuant
to
section 487.051
of the
criminal code
, i make an order for the taking
of his dna.  this is a primary designated offence.
pursuant
to section 161(1)(a.1) of the
criminal code
,
i make a lifetime order
prohibiting jp from being within two kilometers of any place he knows kj or cc
to live, work, go to school, frequent or any place he knows that they are likely
to be.
pursuant
to section 161(1)(b), i make a lifetime order prohibiting jp from seeking,
obtaining or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is
remunerated or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16
years.
pursuant
to section 161(1)(c) i make a lifetime order prohibiting jp from having any
contact with a person under the age of 16 years except:
a)
in the presence
of that person’s parent or guardian, who is aware of jp’s offending behaviour,
and provided that jp is sober and the person under the age of 16 years is
sober; or
b)
with the
approval of the children’s aid society or child welfare agency having
jurisdiction over the person under the age of 16 years; or
c)
incidental
contact of short duration or contact during short commercial transactions.
pursuant
to
section 743.6
of the
criminal code
,
i make an order prohibiting jp
from having contact or communication directly or indirectly, by any physical,
electronic or other means, with kj and cc while he is serving his sentence.
pursuant
to section 490.012(1) and 490.013(1) and (2)(b), i make an order requiring jp to
comply with the
sex offender registration information act
, for a
period of twenty years.
given
that jp has not worked in some time and will be going into custody for a
significant period of time, i find that it would constitute an undue hardship
to impose the victim fine surcharge and i order it waived.
released:  march
27, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson
post-script:  prior to reading this
judgment into the record, defence counsel indicated that jp has 24 days of
presentence custody.  jp kept track of the number of days where he was in
lock-down or housed three or four to a cell and his notes were marked as
exhibit 4.  he invited me to provide additional credit above the usual
summers
credit of 1.5:1, pursuant to the decision of the court of appeal in
r. v.
duncan
,
2016 onca 754
and
r. v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344
.  i
agree that conditions at ottawa-carleton detention centre (o.c.d.c.) are harsh
and deplorable.  i find that granting jp with the additional credit sought by
defence counsel would  not render the sentence imposed unfit.  using 365 days
as the basis of one year, the period of the sentence imposed in paragraph 76 is
calculated as follows:
a)
24 days served; 48 days credit;
b)
1777 days left to be served.
defence counsel also sought a
recommendation that jp be placed in “protective custody.”  i recommend that the
correctional service of canada classify jp as quickly as possible and transfer
him as quickly as possible to the institution where he can receive the sexual
offending, substance abuse and psychological and/or psychiatric treatment he
desperately needs.