ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. valliant
, 2025 oncj 548
date:
2025 10 21
court
file no.:  pembroke 998 25 37100176
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
neil valliant
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on april 22, august 12, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 21, 2025
james bocking and richard morris............................................. counsel
for the crown
joshua clarke.............................................................................. counsel
for the defendant
richardson,
j.:
introduction
on february 12, 2025, shortly before 11:45 pm,
the bucolic silence of the village of westmeath was broken by three sounds that
are unnatural in that setting at that hour.
first, the blaring of a car alarm.
second, the report of a shotgun blast.
third, the report of another shotgun blast.
mr. valliant was sleeping in his home in
westmeath.  he had had too much to drink and had fallen asleep.  he had to work
the next day.  his sleep was disturbed by the blaring of a car alarm from his
neighbour’s f-150.
frustrated with the disruption to his sleep, his
judgment impaired by the consumption of too much drink, mr. valliant donned his
12-guage, which was one of the three firearms he had inherited from a relative.
he left his house and shot the grille of the
f-150.
one shot was not enough for mr. valliant to
express his utter disdain at the inanimate f-150 for the disruption to his
sleep.
for good measure, he shot the vehicle again.
mr. valliant was not licensed to possess those
guns or the ammunition that he had for them.
police were called and he was charged.
on april 22, 2025, mr. valliant entered pleas to
one count of committing mischief over $5000 by discharging two 12-guage shotgun
rounds into the ford f-150, contrary to
section 430
of the
criminal code
and one count of possessing a firearm without being the holder of a licence to
possess it contrary to
section 91
of the
criminal code.
the issue in this case is the appropriate sentence.
defence counsel argued for a conditional
discharge.  crown counsel argued for a suspended sentence.
detailed facts
on february 12, 2025 at 11:45 pm, provincial
police responded to the complaint of a vehicle alarm sounding on grace street
in westmeath.  the caller advised that they also heard two gunshots.
the caller saw mr. valliant go outside with
“something long in his hand”.
en route, police contacted mr. valliant.  mr.
valliant complained that the alarm was going off and he had to work the next
day. he confessed to shooting the truck.  police told him to come out with his
hands up when they arrived.  he complied.
police arrived at 12:18 am.  mr. valliant was
arrested without incident. police observed two large holes in the grille of the
f-150.  they also observed a spent shotgun shell on the roadway.
mr. valliant again admitted to shooting the
truck. he was cooperative with the police and took them to where his firearms
and ammunition were stored in his house.  three firearms and a quantity of
ammunition were ultimately seized.
he did not have a license to possess the
firearms.
upon hearing the plea, at defence request, the
matter was adjourned for mr. valliant to engage in some counselling.
the social-geographic context in
which the offence was committed
i have practised or presided in rural eastern
ontario for about half of my thirty years of professional life, the last ten of
which i have practised or presided in renfrew county.  i do not own firearms,
nor do i engage in hunting.  what follows is what i understand about the community
where these offences were committed.
westmeath is a quiet, peaceful village located
on the shore of the ottawa river in whitewater region township in the county of
renfrew.  it is home to about 350 souls.
the village consists of a convenience store, a
couple of churches, some local artisans and a winery.
the population increases substantially in summer
due to cottagers.  this is a place where people come to escape the city and
enjoy the outdoors.
some might describe westmeath as “sleepy”.
surrounding the village is some of the finest farmland in the valley.  there
are idyllic rolling hills of fields of hay, corn, soybeans, dairy and livestock
operations.
there is not a lot of crime in westmeath.  there
is the occasional break and enter, theft and the usual array of impaired
driving and intimate partner violence cases that are unfortunately part of day-to-day
life in ontario.
it is, generally speaking, a tranquil
environment.
nighttime is still and silent.  one might hear
the hum of an errant electrical transformer, the barking of a dog spooked by
its shadow, the occasional passing of a vehicle, or the din of a farmer, working
late with tractor to get the hay bales off the field before it rains.   in
winter, when this offence was committed, it is even quieter.
at any time of day, car alarms and gunshots are
rarely heard.
unlike the city, or even a small town such as
nearby pembroke, where a car alarm is a more frequent and routine event, in
westmeath, car alarms are also rarely heard.  when they do arise, they somehow
seem louder than in a busy city or town, even though logic dictates that cannot
be true.
at night, they seem particularly loud.
daytime gunshots are more common when people
participate in the tradition of hunting. occasionally, one will hear gunshots
outside of hunting season, when teenagers are engaging in some target practice
under the watchful supervision of a parent, or when a farmer must dispatch a
pest to protect his crop or his livestock.
gunshots at night mean trouble.
many people in this part of ontario learn the
proper care and handling of firearms at an early age.  there are many gun and
hunting clubs in the area.  like a driver’s license, getting one’s gun licence
and participating in the hunt is a rite of passage.
firearms and hunting are part of rural ontario
culture.  firearms are passed from generation to generation.  while hunting is
traditionally a male-dominated pastime, that is less the case with each passing
year.  many women now also take part.  children are often taken out of school
to participate.
lest one think that this an activity only pursued
by the privileged, for many, hunting supplements the family food supply.
indigenous people also hunt for subsistence and to practice traditional ways.
albeit begrudgingly, most responsible hunters
and firearms enthusiasts accept gun control as a fact of life.
i daresay that most of them would be annoyed to
hear about mr. valliant’s crimes.
some would be angered.
people who behave like mr. valliant perpetrate
the stereotype that all gun owners are drunken, trigger-happy, redneck yahoos
who are a hair’s breadth from committing a mass casualty event, such as we too
often see on american news media.
responsible firearms owners have licenses and
obey regulations. they do not use their firearms when they are intoxicated.  they
realise the inherent danger that comes with possession of their firearms.
it is not uncommon for individuals in this
county to possess firearms without a licence.  their disobedience is a result
of one or more of the following factors:
a)
laziness,
b)
indifference,
c)
protest against what they perceive to be unjust laws brought about
by city folk who do not understand rural ways,
d)
protest against what they perceive to be excessive government and
regulation, and
e)
some also, unfortunately, believe that it is their constitutional,
if not god-given, right to possess firearms.
such individuals are not responsible firearms
owners.  such individuals flirt, not only with criminal conviction, and the
collateral consequences that come with having a criminal record, but also with
the prospect of being sentenced to a period of incarceration.
victim impact
the crown advised that the victim did not wish
to file a victim impact statement.
the crown stated that the victim was not really
affected by what happened, other than he wished to receive $500 to cover his insurance
policy’s deductible for the damage to his car that was not covered by
insurance.
counselling
exhibit 1 is a letter dated july 20, 2025 under
the signature of taryn de bruyn of the robbie dean counselling centre in
pembroke.  ms de bruyn advises that mr. valliant completed an anger management
course.  the course consisted of eight weekly sessions, each lasting 90
minutes.  ms de bruyn wrote:
mr. valliant
has been a reliable participant in the anger management group.  he contributed
thoughtfully to group discussions and has shown a genuine willingness to
reflect on his experiences.  he has made notable progress in understanding and applying
emotional regulation strategies.
exhibit 2 is a letter dated august 5, 2025 under
the signature of adrienne campbell of the pathways alcohol and drug treatment
services.  she reported that mr. valliant referred himself to pathways on march
7, 2025.  ms campbell wrote:
to date, mr.
valliant and i have met on eight occasions, focussing on prevention through
identifying his triggers, managing cravings, education on the three stages of
relapse, creating a recovery safe plan, dealing with slips and getting back on
track and the importance of having a routine and incorporating self care.
mr. valliant
engages in every appointment.  in just a few short months, mr. valliant has
made impeccable progress in regards to his alcohol use.  he continues to work
hard on his recovery and has been abstaining from alcohol.
she also noted that she expected mr. valliant to
continue with therapy after he was sentenced.
defence submissions
defence counsel asked me to grant a conditional
discharge followed by 12 months of probation.
he indicated that most of the damage that was
caused to the truck, amounting to over $7000, was paid for by the complainant’s
insurance company.   he stated that the complainant was $500 out of pocket for
the deductible, which defence counsel had in trust for payment over to the
complainant.
defence counsel indicated that mr. valliant
works full-time as a driver.  he is a canadian citizen with a high school
education.  he is 50 years old.  he does not have a criminal record.  he is single
and he lives in his own house.
defence counsel essentially submitted that this
was an isolated incident in which mr. valliant acted foolishly because his
judgment was impaired by his alcoholism.  he was upset that the vehicle alarm
on his neighbour’s f-150 was going off.  when the incident happened, he was
using alcohol on a daily basis.  he had fallen asleep after drinking.  he was
frustrated and angry because his sleep was disrupted.
he stated that, as evidenced by the counselling
letters, mr. valliant has now made sincere efforts to live a sober lifestyle.
defence counsel noted that although mr. valliant did not
have a licence to possess the firearms, they were inherited from a relative and
he simply did not follow through on obtaining the appropriate licenses.
defence counsel acknowledged that the discharge of the firearm in
a residential area is a serious matter.  he suggested that there was no risk to
the public because it happened in the middle of the night.
he also acknowledged that there should be an order for forfeiture
of the shotgun and mr. valliant should be placed on a weapons prohibition.
crown submissions
crown counsel stated that the crown position was a suspended
sentence but allowed that a conditional discharge might be appropriate because
mr. valliant was doing everything he can be expected to do to rehabilitate
himself.  crown counsel acknowledged that this appeared to be an isolated
incident.
crown counsel disagreed with defence counsel’s suggestion that
there was no risk to the public.
i agree with crown counsel.  someone could have been seriously
injured or even killed, if one of the bullets from mr. valliant’s shotgun had
strayed into the home of one of his neighbours.
mr. valliant’s allocution
mr. valliant apologized for his actions.  he admitted that he had
been drinking.  the vehicle alarm disrupted his sleep and woke him up.  he
stated that “it took me off the deep end”.
he stated that, in addition to the counselling set out above, he
was going to aa.
he acknowledged that the victims and his neighbours are
uncomfortable around him.  “it is a black mark on me forever”, he stated.  these
are measures of specific deterrence and denunciation that the community has
levied against mr. valliant.
analysis
the aggravating
factors
the following factors are aggravating:
a)
the firearms were unlicensed.  i note that the firearms were
apparently inherited, but no excuse was offered for mr. valliant not following
through with licensing them.  he does not benefit from the finding that he is
an otherwise responsible gun owner.
b)
a firearm was discharged.  twice.
c)
a firearm was discharged in a semi-urban environment or a small
rural village in the middle of the night, increasing the risk of harm.   responsible
gun owners do not discharge firearms in a semi-urban environment in the middle
of the night.
d)
mr. valliant had been drinking to excess.  sometimes a drinking
problem can work in mitigation of sentence.  in this case it works in aggravation
given the exponential increase in the risk of harm that possession and
discharge of a firearm by an intoxicated person entails.  a responsible gun
owner does not use their firearms when they have been drinking.
e)
the firearm caused substantial damage to his neighbour’s vehicle.  the
damage amount was over $7000.  mr. valliant is willing to pay the deductible.
the rest of the cost will be paid by his neighbour’s insurance.  i was not
asked to make a restitution order in favour of the neighbour’s insurance
company against mr. valliant.  if i had been so asked, i would have made it.  the
insurance company will have to sue mr. valliant civilly to recover, failing
which everyone pays for mr. valliant’s foolhardiness.
the
mitigating factors
the following factors work in mitigation of sentence:
a)
mr. valliant was fully cooperative with the police.
b)
mr. valliant entered a guilty plea quickly.  the public has been
spared the time and expense of a trial.
c)
mr. valliant has worked hard to address the underlying problems that
contributed to his crime:  his alcoholism and anger management.
d)
mr. valliant does not have a criminal record.
e)
mr. valliant is gainfully employed.
f)
mr. valliant has given his lawyer $500 in order
to make his neighbour whole.
g)
mr. valliant has been subjected to community-based deterrence and
denunciation as a result of his crimes.
the
absence of aggravating factors
the following factors are not present here:
a)
the firearms involved were not handguns, nor were they prohibited or
restricted weapons.
b)
mr. valliant was not in possession of the firearms to engage in a
criminal enterprise, such as drug trafficking.
c)
although he was not licenced, mr. valliant acquired the firearms
legally (through inheritance).
the
statutory framework for sentencing
sections 718
,
718.1
and
718.2
of the
criminal
code
set out the applicable sentencing principles:
718     the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance
of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one
or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to
denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that
is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b)
to
deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c)
to
separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to
assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to
provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to
promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm
done to victims or to the community.
718.1
a
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.
718.2
a
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a)
a
sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating
or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice
or hate based on race, national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion,
sex, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity
or expression, or on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence,
abused the offender’s intimate partner or a member of the victim or the
offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence,
abused a person under the age of eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence that the offender involved a person under the age
of 18 years in the commission of the offence,
(iii)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence,
abused a position of trust or authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the
victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances, including their
health and financial situation,
(iii.2)
evidence that the offence was committed against a person
who, in the performance of their duties and functions, was providing health
services, including personal care services,
(iv)
evidence that the offence was committed for the benefit
of, at the direction of or in association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence that the offence was committed while the offender
was subject to a conditional sentence order made under section 742.1 or
released on parole, statutory release or unescorted temporary absence under
the
corrections and conditional release act
, and
(vii)
evidence that the commission of the offence had the effect
of impeding another person from obtaining health services, including personal
care services,
shall be deemed to be
aggravating circumstances;
(b)
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c)
where
consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly
long or harsh;
(d)
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
pursuant to section 730(1), the court may grant
a discharge where the court is satisfied that to do so is in the interests of
the offender and is not contrary to the public interest.
the granting of a discharge is almost always in
the interests of the accused.  a discharge allows the offender to state that
they do not have a criminal record.
a conditional discharge allows the court to
place the offender on conditions, set out in a probation order, which they must
comply with in order for the discharge to become absolute.
in this way, a conditional discharge is very
similar to a suspended sentence.
there are two main differences.  first, a
suspended sentence means that the offender has a criminal record.  second, when
the court suspends the passing of sentence and the offender reoffends, the
crown has the option of making an application to ask the court to revisit the
“suspended sentence” and to impose a sentence for the crime.  although this
possibility exists, in ontario at least, it is an option that is rarely
pursued.
there are, of course, other sentencing options,
including fines, conditional sentences of imprisonment and actual sentences of
imprisonment.  all of those involve the imposition of a criminal record.  the
latter two involve deprivation of liberty.
principles
of firearms sentencing
in
r. v. nur,
2015 scc 15
, the majority
of the supreme court of canada noted at paragraph 6 that:
firearm-related
offences are serious crimes.  parliament has sought to protect the public
from firearm-related injuries and to deter crimes involving firearms through a
combination of strict licensing and registration requirements under the
firearms act
, s.c.
1995, c. 39
, and criminal prohibitions under part iii of the
criminal code
:
reference
re firearms act (can.)
,
2000 scc 31
,
1 s.c.r. 783
(“
firearms reference
”)
.
the court also noted that anyone who
wished to possess a firearm must obtain a licence (paragraph 8) and that the
licensing and registration provisions of the
firearms act
are reinforced
by the
criminal code
which criminalizes those who possess firearms in
contravention of the
firearms act
(paragraph 10).
nur,
and the companion case of
charles,
were largely
about the constitutionality of mandatory minimum sentences in cases involving
possession of loaded prohibited firearms.  in both cases, the firearm in
question was a loaded handgun.
largely in agreement with justice
doherty of the ontario court of appeal, the supreme court struck down the
mandatory minimum sentences on the basis that it was reasonably foreseeable
that the application of those sentences may have a disproportionate effect on some
offenders.  the court noted at paragraph 82:
at one end of the range, as
doherty j.a. observed, “stands the outlaw who carries a loaded prohibited or
restricted firearm in public places as a tool of his or her criminal
trade. . . . [t]his person is engaged in truly criminal conduct
and poses a real and immediate danger to the public”: para. 51.  at this
end of the range — indeed for the vast majority of offences — a three-year
sentence may be appropriate.  a little further along the spectrum stands
the person whose conduct is less serious and poses less danger; for these
offenders three years’ imprisonment may be disproportionate, but not grossly
so. at the far end of the range, stands the licensed and responsible gun owner
who stores his unloaded firearm safely with ammunition nearby, but makes a
mistake as to where it can be stored.
i observe at this point that mr. valliant is at
neither end of the spectrum.  he is not a responsible gun owner.  however, he
is far from an outlaw.  the firearm involved was not prohibited or restricted.
he does not engage in a criminal trade, such as drug trafficking.
in
r. v. yang,
2018 onca 230
, the
offender fired a semi-automatic handgun three times in his apartment.  one of
the bullets penetrated his neighbour’s apartment and came to rest near the toys
belonging to his neighbour’s children.  the offender was intoxicated.  he was
licensed to possess the handgun.  there were immigration consequences to a
conviction.
the trial judge granted the offender to a
conditional discharge.  it is noted that the offender had five and a half
months of pre-sentence custody.  the crown appealed.
at paragraphs three to six, the court of appeal
found as follows:
…as the trial judge said, these
actions were about “as careless as one can imagine” and could “easily have
caused immeasurable tragedy”.
the sentencing judge erred in
placing insufficient weight on the primary sentencing principles of general
deterrence and denunciation. the trial judge also erred in using the fact of
the appellant’s intoxication as a mitigating factor, when in fact it was a
significant aggravating factor in this case.
there were numerous aggravating
factors involved, including the multiple shots fired and the inherent
dangerousness of the respondent’s conduct, which could have had catastrophic
results.
in these circumstances, a
conditional discharge was not available….
in
r. v. kunnuk,
2020 nucj 19
, justice
cooper was sitting on appeal of a trial decision in a case where the drunken accused
threatened his wife with suicide.  his wife removed the children from the home
and went to a grandparent’s from which she called police. police attended and
found the accused passed out with a loaded .22 calibre firearm nearby.  the
accused had a prior record for firearms offences.  justice cooper found that
the trial judge was in error in granting a conditional discharge on the public
interest criteria and should have imposed a suspended sentence.  she stated at
paragraphs 31-32:
firearms are
ubiquitous in nunavut. most households have more than one firearm. they are a
necessary tool to carry out a proud hunting tradition. it is for these same
reasons that they must be handled and stored properly at all times. improper
handling or storage of firearms places people at risk and must be denounced by
the court. unfortunately, firearms are too often picked up and used improperly;
most often when someone is drunk and distraught. many of those incidents end
without injury; some end tragically. in many of the cases, as in this case, the
offender has little or no recollection of the incident. it is for this reason
that firearm owners must turn their minds to proper storage at all times and
make it a matter of habit. the more layers and steps that a person has to go
through to access their properly stored firearms and ammunition, the less
likely it is that the firearm will be taken up in a drunken state.
firearm owners
must know that instances of improper handling and storage of a firearm will be
treated seriously by the court. they must know that the misuse of firearms
carries with it not only the risk of a criminal record, but also the potential
of forfeiture of the firearm itself and, perhaps most importantly, loss of the
privilege to own and possess a firearm. it is this knowledge of the potential
for serious consequences, including the loss of the ability to hunt and provide
for family, that will hopefully deter firearm owners from handling and storing
firearms without the utmost care and diligence.
in
r. v. kingma,
2022 oncj 570
, justice
a. mcleod granted an absolute discharge for a first-time offender who pulled
out a handgun at a family gathering and said, “i can fire this thing”.  the
offender was licensed to possess the handgun.  the ammunition for the handgun
was in his pocket.  he turned over both the handgun and the ammunition to a
family member peaceably.  no shots were ever fired, and no one was threatened.
he had completed substantial up-front programming.
the
sentence imposed
this case places me on the horns of a dilemma.
on the one hand, it is difficult to avoid the
temptation of rewarding mr. valliant for all of the mitigating factors in this
case, in particular, the glowing up-front work that he has completed and the
extent to which he expresses remorse and insight into his crime.  i also
acknowledge the degree to which he has been denounced and deterred by his
community for what he has done.
on the other hand, it is equally difficult to
not be swayed by the fact that mr. valliant was intoxicated when he committed
the crime.  the crime involved not only possession but also the discharge of a
firearm in a semi-urban setting.  he was unlicensed to possess three firearms
without any excuse, and the risk of harm to the public by his conduct was
extremely high.
in the final analysis, i find that the bridge to
a conditional discharge is just too far.   it is not in the public interest.  i
will suspend the passing of sentence and place mr. valliant on probation for 12
months with the following terms:
a)
the usual statutory terms.
b)
a condition requiring him to report to a probation officer until he
has completed all his required counselling.
c)
a condition requiring him to have no contact or communication
directly or indirectly by any physical, electronic or other means with shane
dunstan except with the written consent of shane dunstan.
d)
a condition requiring him to not possess any weapons.
e)
a condition requiring him to attend and actively participate in all
assessment, treatment and counselling including anger management and substance
abuse.
f)
a condition requiring him to pay over $500 to
the credit of shane dunstan for restitution.
pursuant to
section 110
(b) of the
criminal
code
, i make an order prohibiting mr. valliant from possessing any firearm
for ten years.
pursuant to
section 491
of the
criminal code
,
i also make an order forfeiting the shotgun used by mr. valliant to the crown.
released:  october 21, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson