ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. norris
, 2025 oncj 502
date:
2025 09 29
court
file no.:  toronto 4810 998 23 48114102
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
dru norris
before
justice robert wright
heard
on september 4, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 29, 2025
o. ahmed.............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
n. sandhu...............................................................
counsel for the defendant dru norris
r. wright j.:
on april 4, 2025, following a trial, i found dru
norris guilty of sexual assault and four counts of failing to comply with a
condition of a release order. the victim of the sexual assault was his former
intimate partner. he sexually assaulted her while on a release order that
prohibited him from attending her specific address, being within 100 metres of
her, and having any contact with her. he further breached the non-contact
condition when he contacted her the day following the sexual assault by
telephone.
the crown seeks a global sentence of 2-years
jail followed by 12-months probation, a dna order, a s. 110 order and a soira order.
the defence acknowledges that a custodial
sentence is appropriate but submits that mr. norris’ pre-sentence custody
("psc") of 310 real days, credited as 465 days, is sufficient time
served for these offences considering the mitigating features, including the
harsh conditions of his psc. the probation and ancillary orders are not
opposed.
the offences
the victim in this matter is mr. norris' former
intimate partner. on august 13, 2023, he was subject to a release order which
included conditions prohibiting him from having contact with her, attending at
her address, or being within 100 metres of her.
on august 13, 2023, he telephoned her and
arranged to visit her at her residence on his way to mississauga. he attended
in the afternoon.
they engaged in some conversation during which
he told her he had been in custody and had not had sex for some time. he began
touching her flirtatiously and told her he wanted to “smack,” which meant he
wanted to have sex.
she told him she was seeing someone and that she
did not want to have sex. she told him no several times.
he picked her up, put her over his shoulder, and
carried her to the couch. she was now laying down on the couch. he asked again
“are you serious, you really don't want to have sex.” she repeated, “no.” he
then asked her if she would call the police if he raped her.
mr. norris then penetrated her with his finger
for a brief time. he did not seek her consent first. she was crying. he pulled
her shorts down and pulled his penis out through the front of his pants and
then penetrated her vagina with his penis. he did not seek her consent first.
penetration lasted approximately 30 seconds and
ended when the victim screamed loudly and told him to get off of her. he then
stood up and asked her why she was freaking out and told her she was unstable.
he ordered her food and offered to return with
marijuana for her. he left her residence. shortly after, he started texting her
to gauge her intentions and to attempt to placate her. he texted her multiple
times that day and telephoned her the next day.
after seeking support from a friend, the victim
went to police and reported the allegations.
victim input
i did not receive a victim impact statement.
however, i heard from the victim in the course of the trial and am considering
her evidence from trial pursuant to
s. 722(9)
of the
criminal code of canada
(“
code
”).
she testified to her surprise in the moment when
he ignored her refusal and assaulted her. she testified to crying while it was
happening before she screamed and he stopped. she also testified to the
difficult emotional experience she had in deciding to report the assault to the
police. the assault was incredibly difficult for her emotionally.
the offender
mr. norris is 26-years old. he has a prior
criminal record, although it does not include any prior sexual offending. his
retainable record commences in 2017, and his most recent entry is from january
of 2025. at the time he committed these offences, in august of 2023, he had a
record that included six prior failures to comply with a condition of a release
order, four assaults, and two robberies. the longest credit he had received for
custody had been 62 days (applicable to an assault and two counts of failing to
comply with a condition of release order less than four months prior to these
offences).
i had the benefit of a pre-sentence report (“psr”)
which outlined much helpful information about mr. norris:
(1)
mr. norris is a young, black man who was raised
between canada and antigua. he moved to antigua when he was around the age of
two with his parents. they divorced when he was five and he and his sister
returned to live with their grandparents. his grandmother suffered serious
burns when he was around the age of eight, which prevented her from caring for
the children and they were sent back to antigua to reside with their mother.
mr. norris returned to canada to again reside with his grandparents prior to
commencing high school.
(2)
mr. norris has completed grade 11. he has worked
in construction, doing drywall work, and landscaping. he was last employed in
november of 2023. his house arrest condition prevented him from seeking work
since being released on bail in march 2025. tracy stoddart, the mother of his
current partner, has been acting as his surety, supporting him and providing
him with room and board. mr. norris expressed that he would like to find
employment and help provide for his family. he would like to go to college or
enroll into an apprenticeship program in a trade.
(3)
mr. norris has been supervised by probation in
relation to charges that post-date this offence since september 23, 2024.
however, he spent a large portion of the supervision period in custody. since
his release from custody on march 7, 2025, he has been reporting consistently
and has completed the intake for the partner assault response program through
family services of peel. he has been cooperative and forthcoming at reporting
appointments. while a prior psr had described his attitude as “nonchalant,” the
current report writer noted a positive change in his attitude.
(4)
mr. norris expressed remorse to the report
writer for his involvement in these offences. he acknowledged that he should
have accepted the victim’s “no” and let it be. he further recognizes he was in
the wrong for having contact with the victim when he was bound by a court order
to not have any contact. he also expressed empathy toward the victim.
(5)
he shares two children with his current partner,
breanna stoddart. the children reside with her, and mr. norris’ intent is to
reside together once he is no longer on bail. ms. stoddart described her
relationship with him as positive.
(6)
tracy stoddart also spoke positively about him
noting that he has made a lot of positive changes in his attitude and is trying
to be a “better person.” she indicated that in the past she had some safety
concerns for her daughter in the relationship with him, but she has developed a
positive rapport with mr. norris and described him as having matured over the
past year.
i received letters of support from both of mr.
norris' grandparents and from breanna stoddart. they express their support for
him and his rehabilitation, and ask that he not be re-incarcerated in order to
assist in their ongoing care and support for his family.
mr. norris has spent 310 days in psc between
maplehurst correctional and the toronto south detention centre. most of this
time was spent at maplehurst. records were filed as exhibits. they show a
significant amount of time on lockdown, partial lockdown, and triple-bunking:
92 days on lockdown, 28 days on partial lockdown, and triple-bunking 88% of the
time. lockdowns are the result of correctional officer or other staff shortages
or redeployment, searches, contraband, or unscheduled maintenance. persons in
custody at maplehurst typically receive 6.5 hours of access to dayroom
privileges with other inmates and are secured in their cells for 17.25 hours
per day. a full lockdown results in confinement to a cell for the 6.5 hours
that would typically be spent in the dayroom. a partial lockdown means an
inmate was confined to his cell for some part of the 6.5 hours. the records filed
disclose that mr. norris had full access to all privileges (showers, dayroom,
phone, and television) except when he was on full lock-down.
applicable sentencing principles
section 718.1
of the
code
states that the
fundamental principle of sentencing is proportionality. to be a fit sentence,
the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender.
ss.
718.2
and
718.04
of the
code
set out
a number of other considerations:
718.2 a court
that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a) a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing,
…
(ii) evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,…
…
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances.
…
(d) an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e) all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
…
other aggravating and mitigating factors and the
offender’s personal circumstances must be considered, but “[w]here parliament
has indicated which sentencing objectives are to receive priority in certain
cases, the sentencing judge's discretion is thereby limited, such that it is no
longer open to the judge to elevate other sentencing objectives to an equal or
higher priority”:
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at para.
104
. in
friesen
,
at para.
89
, the supreme court also stated that sexual violence is morally
blameworthy because “the offender is treating the victim as an object and
disregarding the victim’s human dignity."
in cases of sexual violence, the court’s
emphasis must remain on denunciation and general deterrence. these sentencing
principles take on increasing significance as the seriousness of the violation
of the sexual integrity of the victim rises: see
r. v. thurairajah
,
2008
onca 91
, at para.
42
. rehabilitation, while still important, takes on less
weight accordingly: see also
r. v. mohenu
,
2019 onca 291
, at para.
12
.
over thirty years ago, the supreme court of
canada commented on the devastating effects of sexual violence on women. in
r.
v. mccraw
,
1991 canlii 29 (scc)
, 3 s.c.r. 72 at 83-84, the court
wrote:
it seems to me
that to argue that a woman who has been forced to have sexual intercourse has
not necessarily suffered grave and serious violence is to ignore the
perspective of women. for women rape under any circumstance must constitute a
profound interference with their physical integrity. as well, by force or
threat of force, it denies women the right to exercise freedom of choice as to
their partner for sexual relations and the timing of those relations. these are
choices of great importance that may have a substantial effect upon the life
and health of every woman. parliament's intention in replacing the rape laws
with the sexual assault offences was to convey the message that rape is not
just a sexual act but is basically an act of violence…
recently, in
r. v. a.j.k.
,
2022 onca 487
,
fairburn a.c.j.o. held that the forced penetration of another person will
typically result in a sentence of between three and five years in a
penitentiary. that was a case where the crown had proceeded by indictment. the
court stated the following about the terrible nature of sexual assaults,
recognizing the continuing evolution of our collective understanding in this
regard:
all
sexual assaults are serious acts of violence. they reflect the wrongful
exploitation of the victim whose personal autonomy, sexual integrity, and
dignity is harmfully impacted while being treated as nothing more than an
object. whether intimate partners or strangers, victims of sexual violence suffer
profound emotional and physical harm and their lives can be forever altered. so
too can the lives of their loved ones.
see also:
r. v. r.s.
,
2023 onca
608
.
the combination of s. 719(3) of the
code
and
r. v. summers
,
2014 scc 26
, entitles offenders to a maximum credit
of 1.5 days per real day of custody. mr. norris served 310 days of real
pre-sentence custody. that means any sentence of imprisonment is to be reduced
by 465 days.
in
r. v. marshall #1
,
2021 onca 344
,
doherty j.a. clarified how harsh psc conditions should be treated:
: …
“summers” credit already takes into account the difficult and restrictive
circumstances offenders often encounter during pretrial custody:
summers
,
at paras.
28-29
. the “
duncan
” credit addresses exceptionally punitive conditions
which go well beyond the normal restrictions associated with pretrial custody.
the very restrictive conditions in the jails and the health risks brought on by
covid-19 are a good example of the kind of circumstance that may give rise to a
“
duncan
” credit:
r. v. morgan
,
2020 onca 279
.
…
the “
duncan
”
credit is not a deduction from the otherwise appropriate sentence, but is one
of the factors to be taken into account in determining the appropriate
sentence. particularly punitive pretrial incarceration conditions can be a
mitigating factor to be taken into account with the other mitigating and
aggravating factors in arriving at the appropriate sentence from which the “
summers
”
credit will be deducted. because the “
duncan
” credit is one of the mitigating
factors to be taken into account, it cannot justify the imposition of a
sentence which is inappropriate, having regard to all of the relevant
mitigating or aggravating factors.
often
times, a specific number of days or months are given as “
duncan
” credit.
while this quantification is not necessarily inappropriate, it may skew the
calculation of the ultimate sentence. by quantifying the “
duncan
”
credit, only one of presumably several relevant factors, there is a risk the “
duncan
”
credit will be improperly treated as a deduction from the appropriate sentence
in the same way as the “
summers
” credit. if treated in that way, the
“duncan” credit can take on an unwarranted significance in fixing the ultimate
sentence imposed […]
analysis
there are a number of aggravating features in
this case:
(1)
persistence: it is aggravating that mr. norris
persisted in his sexual advances despite repeated efforts to stop him, going so
far as to ask the victim if she would call police on him if he raped her;
(2)
s 718.2(a)(ii): it is statutorily aggravating
that the victim was his prior intimate partner;
(3)
criminal record: mr. norris’ record, which
includes both prior violence and prior breaches of conditions of release
orders, is aggravating; and,
(4)
breach of release order: mr. norris was bound by
a court order which prevented contact with the victim at the time of these
offences.
there are also a number of mitigating factors:
(1)
remorse: mr. norris has expressed his remorse to
the psr writer, and directly to the court. i accept that he is remorseful for
these offences;
(2)
family support: the support of his grandparents
and his present partner and her mother and his efforts at supporting his family
and young children all speak well for him and support his rehabilitative
potential; and,
(3)
harsh psc conditions: mr. norris spent 92 days
of his psc at maplehurst on full lockdown, and was housed in an over-capacity
cell for 88% of his custody. this harsh psc is mitigating.
considering the aggravating and mitigating
features, the sentence i impose on mr. norris must denounce his conduct, deter
him from future offending, deter others from similar offending, and it must aid
in his rehabilitation. it must also promote a sense of responsibility in mr.
norris and acknowledge the harm done to the victim. while these principles
require a jail sentence, it must not be longer than is necessary to meet these
principles.
the crown proceeded summarily. the maximum
sentence available on the sexual assault is 18-months. the crown submitted that
a further six-month consecutive sentence should be imposed for the breaches of
court order to amount to the 2-year sentence sought.
i disagree with the crown’s submission that a
six-month sentence would be appropriate for the breaches of release order.
while i found mr. norris guilty of four counts of failing to comply with release
order, those four counts relate to two separate acts on two separate days. i
have further considered the fact that he was on a release order with conditions
prohibiting contact with this victim as an aggravating feature on the count of
sexual assault. as such, in my view, it is appropriate to impose concurrent
sentences on the fail to comply counts from august 13. on the count of failing
to comply for contacting her on the following day, it is appropriate that the
sentence be consecutive.
with the mitigating and aggravating features i
have outlined, and, in particular taking into account the harsh psc, the
appropriate total sentence is approximately 15.5 months jail to be followed by
12-months probation. if it were not for the harsh psc conditions, i would have
imposed a sentence of 18 months jail.
sentence
mr. norris has served 310 real days of psc.
those will be credited as 465 days.
to properly reflect the principle of totality,
in accordance with
r. v. ahmed
,
2017 onca 76
the sentence will be
recorded as:
(1)
counts 1, 2 and 3, fail to comply release order:
the passing of sentence is suspended with a 12-month probation order,
concurrent on each count;
(2)
count 4, sexual assault: 290 days of psc are
credited as 435 days jail and the passing of sentence is suspended with a
12-month probation order, concurrent to counts 1, 2 and 3;
(3)
count 5, fail to comply release order: 20 days
of psc are credited as 30 days jail and the passing of sentence is suspended
with a 12-month probation order, concurrent to counts 1, 2, 3 and 4. this has
the effect of treating this count as consecutive time.
the conditions of the probation are:
(1)
keep the peace and be of good behaviour
(2)
appear before the court when required to do so
by the court
(3)
notify the court or probation officer in advance
of any change of name or address and promptly notify the court or the probation
officer of any change in employment or occupation
(4)
report in person to a probation officer
immediately and after that, at all times and places as directed by the
probation officer or any person authorized by a probation officer to assist in
your supervision
(5)
do not contact or communicate in any way,
directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means, with l.t.
(6)
do not be within 100 metres of any place where
you know l.t. to live, work, go to school, frequent or any place you know her
to be except for required court attendances
(7)
do not possess any weapon(s) as defined by the
code
(for example: a bb gun, pellet gun, firearm, imitation firearm, cross-bow,
prohibited or restricted weapon, ammunition or explosive substance or anything
designed to be used or intended for use to cause death or injury or to threaten
or intimidate any person)
(8)
attend and actively participate in all
assessment, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed by the probation
officer and complete them to the satisfaction of the probation officer for, but
not limited to, sexual offending and intimate partner violence which may
include partners assault response (par) program
(9)
you shall sign any release of information forms
as will enable your probation officer to monitor your attendance and completion
of any assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed
(10)
you shall provide proof of your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed
ancillary orders
the crown seeks ancillary orders which were not
opposed.
pursuant to
s. 110
of the
code
, mr.
norris is prohibited from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon,
restricted weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition or explosive substance for a period of 10 years.
dna: sexual assault is a primary designated
offence and failing to comply with a condition of a release order is a
secondary designated offence for the purposes of the dna provisions. on the
secondary-designated counts, it is in the best interest of the administration
of justice to make an order for dna given the nature and circumstances of the
offences and mr. norris’ prior criminal record. mr. norris is ordered to
provide such samples of his bodily substances as are reasonably required for
the purpose of forensic dna analysis to be used in accordance with the
dna
identification act
in relation to these charges.
soira: s. 490.013(2)(a) applies. mr. norris is
ordered to report for 10 years.
victim fine surcharge
i am satisfied that a $500 victim fine surcharge
would amount to an undue hardship on mr. norris, but that a reduced amount
would be manageable given his youth and his prospects. the surcharge is imposed
on counts 4 and 5 ($200 total) with 12-months to pay.
released:  september
29, 2025
signed:
justice robert wright