ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. deschenes
, 2025 oncj 630
date:
2025 12 02
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 24 47104697 & 998 24 47105116
between:
his
majesty the king
(respondent)
— and
—
nickolas deschenes
(applicant)
charter
ruling – warrant review
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
september 23 and november 6, 2025
reasons
released december 2, 2025
jennifer goulin............................................................... counsel
for the provincial crown
tara mimnagh.............................. agent
for the public prosecution service of canada
lauren wilhelm...................................... counsel
for the applicant nickolas deschenes
garg j.:
overview
the police obtained warrants to search two
properties and two motor vehicles. during the searches they found a firearm,
drugs, and cash. most of the evidence was found at a rural property in
burlington. the applicant challenges the warrant for that property. he claims that
his rights were breached under s. 8 of the
charter
and seeks to exclude
the evidence under s. 24(2).
the applicant takes a focused position. he does
not contest the police belief that he trafficked drugs and only contests limited
portions of the information to obtain (ito) in support of the warrant. he focuses
on two related issues in relation to the property:
(a)
the ito did not disclose sufficient grounds to
believe that drugs or related things would be found on the property. the
warrant could thus not have issued.
(b)
in the alternative, the warrant could not have
issued for the entire property. there was no basis to search the dwelling house
and all outbuildings on the property.
i disagree with the applicant on the first
issue. the ito disclosed a reasonable belief that drugs or related things would
be found on the property. however, i agree with the applicant on the second
issue. the issuing justice could not have found that the ito established
reasonable grounds to believe that evidence would be found in every building on
the property. therefore, the warrant could not have issued. the warrantless
search breached the applicant’s s. 8 rights. i nevertheless admit the evidence found
during the search under s. 24(2). the evidence is reliable and vital to the
crown proving serious charges. the gravity of the
charter
breach and its
impact on the applicant’s rights do not outweigh society’s interest in a trial on
the merits.
facts
i will focus on contextual facts that are
relevant to the applicant’s focused position.
on august 21, 2024, the police obtained search warrants
for two properties and two motor vehicles. they executed the warrants the next
day. the warrants were issued under s. 11 of the
controlled drugs and
substances act
. the applicant challenges the warrant for the rural property
at 4211 cedar springs road in burlington. the warrant allowed the police to
search “the dwelling house and all outbuildings” located there.
the police submitted one ito in support of the four
warrants. the affiant was detective constable brandon walmsley of the hamilton
police service. he believed that evidence respecting drug
trafficking would be found in the places to be searched.
the ito named the applicant as the target and outlined his
criminal history—one prior conviction for each offence of drug possession for
the purpose of trafficking, simple drug possession, possession of a prohibited
firearm, and possession contrary to a firearms prohibition order. the ito demonstrated
the applicant’s connection to the drug trafficking subculture.
initial phases of the investigation
the initial phases of the police investigation
focused on the applicant’s activities at an apartment building located at 205
hunter street west in hamilton. the police physically observed the applicant and
watched him through video security footage. i will not recount all the
surveillance that is detailed in the ito. counsel for the applicant acknowledges
that the police formed a reasonable belief that the applicant engaged in drug
trafficking at 205 hunter and conducted several drug transactions before or
after attending that address.
in brief compass, the applicant made a habit of
attending 205 hunter. he did not live there. his visits revealed a pattern of
short stays. he was seen dragging bins or carrying bags that appeared to be
weighted.
the ito outlines instances where the applicant engaged
in apparent drug trafficking before or after attending 205 hunter. on august 1,
the applicant made short visits at different locations. a quick visit in the
morning and one in the afternoon each had characteristics of a drug transaction,
with a trip to 205 hunter in between. on august 2, the police watched the
applicant inside the parking garage at 205 hunter. he was leaning into the
trunk of a grey mercedes that belonged to his mother-in-law. the affiant
believed that the mercedes was one of the applicant’s “stash spots”. he then
left and made multiple short visits that bore the characteristics of drug
trafficking. he returned to 205 hunter before going home.
from 205 hunter to 4211 cedar springs
august 6 is a crucial date in this case.
according to the affiant, it was the date that the applicant moved his stash
from 205 hunter to 4211 cedar springs. the ito outlines how august 6 was the
last time that the applicant attended 205 hunter on a regular basis.
the applicant went there and met
with, damian venditti, who had two prior convictions for drug possession
for the purpose of trafficking. given the significance of this date, i will provide
the full chronology:
comings and goings
the ito outlines the applicant’s comings and goings at 205 hunter
during the early afternoon:
•
at 12:51 p.m., the applicant arrived in the rear
parking lot in a black gmc sierra (“the truck”). he stopped briefly in the
laneway, exited, and threw a large, full black garbage bag into the dumpster. he
then parked in a visitor spot, exited holding a set of keys while talking on
his phone, and walked toward the rear entrance.
•
at 12:52 p.m., cameras inside the building
captured the applicant walking past the elevators toward the stairwell leading
to the underground parking lot.
•
at 12:55 p.m., the truck departed the lot.
•
at 2:04 p.m., the truck returned and parked in a
visitor spot. the applicant was later seen inside the building with a folded
green reusable grocery bag tucked in his rear pocket. he again walked toward
the stairwell.
•
at 2:06 p.m., the applicant exited through the
rear door and returned to his truck. he appeared to be carrying a reusable
grocery bag. he departed immediately.
•
at 3:46 p.m., the truck returned and parked. two
minutes later, deschenes exited the truck while on his phone and walked toward
the rear entrance. he reappeared in the lot, still on the phone, and got back
into the truck. he exited again and re-entered the building, walking toward the
stairwell. at 3:55 p.m., he returned to the truck and departed.
moving the bins
at 5:57 p.m., the applicant again arrived at 205
hunter in the truck. he exited with his phone to his ear, opened the tailgate,
and threw another garbage bag into the dumpster. mr. venditti appeared from the building entrance carrying two large black tote
bins (one with a blue lid, one with a yellow lid) with a red reusable grocery
bag on top. mr. venditti placed
the bins into the bed of the truck and briefly leaned into the passenger side
before returning inside the building. the applicant entered the truck and left.
going to 4211
cedar springs and the activities afterward
the police followed the applicant as he drove
away and arrived at 4211 cedar springs. the only available inference is that
the applicant drove directly from 205 hunter to 4211 cedar springs. no
intervening stops are recorded. however, the ito is completely silent on what,
if anything, the applicant did upon arriving there. the ito does not explain
why the police were unable to make any observations.
the ito outlines the subsequent activities:
•
at 6:51 p.m., live gps tracker data showed the truck
traveling northbound on cedar springs road.
•
at 7:35 p.m., the police located the truck in a
walmart parking lot. at 7:43 p.m., the applicant was seen walking toward the
truck with an unknown male who was carrying a green bin. the applicant was
carrying a blue walmart bag that appeared full. both entered the truck. the
applicant was driving. at 7:45 p.m., the truck left and returned to burlington.
•
at 8:12 p.m., the police followed the applicant back
to 4211 cedar springs. the truck entered through black gates, travelled down
the driveway, and turned behind an outbuilding, going out of view.
•
at 8:42 p.m., the police observed the truck
leaving cedar springs road. the applicant dropped off a woman named jerlasha
anderson, who had a prior conviction for drug possession for the purpose
of trafficking.
•
at 8:55 p.m., the applicant stopped in a
restaurant parking lot. a silver bmw backed in beside his truck. a male exited
the bmw, briefly entered the applicant’s truck, and then returned to his car.
both vehicles left immediately.
•
the police concluded their surveillance after the
tracker data showed the truck returning to the applicant’s home at 106
thoroughbred boulevard in ancaster.
the next day, the police observed the applicant continue
to engage in conduct consistent with drug trafficking. the police saw the
applicant meet briefly with several individuals at different locations while
driving the truck. he first met a male who exited a vehicle at lime ridge mall
and entered the applicant’s truck. later, the applicant returned to his
residence, where ms. anderson joined him in the truck. they then drove to a
sobeys parking lot, where a male briefly entered the applicant’s truck before
returning to his own vehicle. afterward, the applicant traveled to oakville
place mall and met another male who entered his truck before returning to his vehicle.
following these encounters, gps data showed the applicant driving directly to
4211 cedar springs.
gps tracker data
the affiant included tracker data for the truck.
the data showed how long the truck stopped at a location for at least five
minutes. there may have been unreported stops that lasted under five minutes.
it seems that the affiant obtained tracker data
from two sources. the first was an analyst report that covered the period from july
13 to august 11. the report showed 26 stops at 205 hunter for an average
duration of just over 11 minutes. it also showed 19 stops at 4211 cedar springs
with an average duration of approximately 26 minutes. the affiant did not break
down the data from the report into more precise timeframes (like before and
after august 6).
second, the affiant himself seemed to pull tracker
data for the period after august 11. the affiant wrote that the applicant
continued to attend 4211 cedar springs between august 11 and 20, except for
august 14 when the truck was out of town.
the affiant also included a specific example from august 19 where the truck
parked amongst the outbuildings close to the house.
nature of 4211 cedar springs
the ito contains the affiant’s description of 4211 cedar springs.
it is a nine-acre rural property with several outbuildings. the affiant
obtained details from a real estate listing on housesigma, which described the
property as an equestrian facility close to town that included a newer
3,200-square-foot bungalow with three bedrooms and two bathrooms, an 18-stall
horse barn, and a small indoor riding arena. there was also a newer
3,000-square-foot heated shop that was being used for storage, as well as an
older building being used for storage. the property was generating income from
the horse barn at $1,800 per month. the tenant wished to remain, but it was
unclear which building they occupied. it is evident that other individuals had
interests in the property, but the ito did not specify the nature of those
interests.
affiant’s
conclusion
the entire sequence of
events from august 6 led the affiant to believe that the applicant had moved
his stash from 205 hunter to 4211 cedar springs.
furthermore, the applicant was observed attending 4211
cedar springs before or after engaging in activities indicative of drug
trafficking. the affiant believed that drugs or the proceeds from selling drugs
would be found at that location.
correcting the
ito
the affiant’s legal obligation when seeking an
ex
parte
authorization is the full, fair, and frank disclosure of material
information:
r. v. araujo
,
2000 scc 65
at para.
46
. misleading or
inaccurate information can be excised outright from the ito:
r. v. shivrattan
,
2017 onca 23
at para.
26
. information that should not have been included in the
ito will always be excised:
r. v. booth
,
2019 onca 970
at para.
58
.
alternatively, material omissions or inaccuracies can be corrected by adding
information or by replacing incorrect details with accurate ones:
r. v.
morelli
,
2010 scc 8
at paras.
57
, 60, 96;
booth
at para.
59
.
the applicant mostly accepts that the affiant
observed his obligation to be full, fair, and frank. the applicant mounted a
facial attack of the warrant; he did not file other materials to show that the
affiant had omitted material information from the ito.
the applicant does seek to excise one sentence
from the ito.
the affiant wrote at paragraph 80: “observations indicative of drug trafficking
have been observed directly from the property” at 4211 cedar springs. i
reproduce the entire paragraph and underline the sentence at issue:
[the applicant] was observed attending the rural property at
4211 cedar springs in burlington prior to and after engaging in what i believe
to be activities indicative of drug trafficking.
observations indicative of
drug trafficking have been observed directly from the property
. for this
reason, i believe this address is used as a stash location for drugs … .
therefore [i] believe that this is also a location where [the applicant] keeps
the proceeds from the sale of controlled substances. i believe that evidence of
drug trafficking will be located at 4211 cedar springs, ontario.
it is obvious that i must excise that sentence. there
is nothing in the ito that even suggests the police made direct observations
from the property. the affiant’s belief was only drawn from inferences.
general principles
under s. 11 of the
cdsa
, a justice can
issue a search warrant when they are satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a controlled substance, offence-related property, or
any thing that will afford evidence in respect of a drug offence is in the
place to be searched.
the scope of warrant review is narrow. i must
decide whether the corrected record supplies information, reasonably capable of
belief, on which the warrants could have issued. the applicant bears the burden
of showing that the warrants could not have issued:
r. v. paryniuk
,
2017 onca 87
at para.
43
;
r. v. sadikov
,
2014 onca 72
at paras.
83-88
.
the issuing justice considers the ito as a whole to assess
whether, on a common-sense and practical basis, there are reasonable grounds to
believe that evidence of the offence will be found at the specified locations.
this assessment is not technical and does not require that every fact be
explicitly stated in the ito. the issuing justice is entitled to draw
reasonable inferences from the information provided, provided those inferences
are grounded in the contents of the ito:
r. v. vu
,
2013 scc 60
at para.
16
;
r. v. el-azrak
,
2023 onca 440
at paras.
96
, 101;
sadikov
at
para.
82
. the issuing justice will keep in mind that the affiant is not a
meticulous solicitor:
r. v. green
,
2015 onca 579
at para.
18
.
issue #1: reasonable belief that the stash
moved to 4211 cedar springs?
the first issue is whether the issuing justice
could reasonably infer that the applicant moved the stash from 205 hunter to
4211 cedar springs.
if this inference was unavailable, then the warrant for cedar springs could not
have issued. the observations of the applicant conducting drug transactions over
two days before or after attending cedar springs, standing alone, would not
have been enough.
the inference rests on the reasonableness of two
points. first, was it reasonable to infer that the bins contained a drug stash?
if yes, then second, was it reasonable to infer that the bins went to cedar
springs? i will address each point in turn. although applicant’s counsel
focused on the second point, she also argued that the number of inferences needed
to conclude that drugs would be found at cedar springs illustrates the
speculative nature of the affiant’s reasoning.
did the bins contain a drug stash?
i conclude that the issuing justice could infer that the bins
contained controlled substances, drug paraphernalia, or proceeds from
trafficking. the surveillance outlined in the ito established
sustained drug‑trafficking activity anchored at 205 hunter. over several
weeks, the applicant was repeatedly observed engaging in short‑stay
meetings and purposeful attendances in the stairwell and garage area of that building.
these visits were not casual or social; they involved the handling of weighted
bags and plastic storage bins. the pattern was consistent: the applicant arrived,
accessed the garage or stairwell, sometimes retrieved or deposited containers
or bags, and departed without any visible legitimate purpose. on several dates,
the applicant engaged in conduct that was reasonably characterized as drug
trafficking before or after attending 205 hunter.
there are three dates at 205 hunter that warrant
emphasis:
(a)
on july 18, the applicant was seen dragging a
black bin with a blue lid from the b2 garage toward the 10th floor. he later returned
with the same bin and a weighted grocery bag.
(b)
on august 2, the applicant was observed bent
over the trunk of his mother‑in‑law’s mercedes in the b2 garage.
nothing in the record points to a benign explanation for this trunk activity;
in context, it coheres with the established pattern of accessing storage locations
at 205 hunter.
(c)
on august 6, the associate damian
venditti—himself twice convicted of drug trafficking—was observed loading two
plastic storage bins into the applicant’s truck. one of these was again a black
bin with a blue lid, matching the container previously seen in the applicant’s
possession on july 18. this activity occurred immediately before the applicant left
205 hunter.
the applicant’s activity with the bins demonstrated
a controlled system of storage and movement. the choreography of the transfer
on august 6, coupled with the prior bin movements, suggests that these
containers were instrumentalities of the trafficking operation.
the ito permits a reasonable, common‑sense
inference that the bins were used to store controlled substances or related items.
the repeated handling of weighted containers, their concealment somewhere in
the building, and their association with short, purposive attendances at 205
hunter align with a stash practice. this activity must be considered along with
the reasonable belief that the applicant engaged in drug trafficking at 205
hunter and conducted several drug transactions before or after attending the
building. while no contraband was ever seen inside the bins, an inference is available
based on the applicant’s cumulative behaviour.
did the bins go to 4211 cedar springs?
i turn then to the central issue: could the
issuing justice reasonably infer that the bins went to 4211 cedar springs?
applicant’s position
the applicant contends that the ito failed to establish reasonable
grounds to believe that the bins went to 4211 cedar springs.
his counsel emphasizes that the police made no observations of any unloading,
entry into any building, interactions with occupants, or transfers of
items—nothing beyond arrivals and departures at the property. as the argument
goes, the assertion that cedar springs was a “stash location” is a conclusory
belief not grounded in facts. counsel notes that the tracker data merely
reflects stop counts and does not cure the absence of direct observations tying
the bins or their contents to any structure at cedar springs.
analysis
i conclude that it was reasonably open to the issuing justice to
infer that the bins from 205 hunter were transported by the applicant and unloaded
at 4211 cedar springs. i have already explained why it was reasonable to infer
that the bins contained drugs or related items. on august 6, the applicant’s
associate placed two bins into the bed of the truck. the applicant immediately
departed and drove directly to cedar springs. the ito indicates that at 6:36 p.m.
he was followed by the police and arrived at cedar springs. at 6:51 p.m., he
was on the road again. that short visit would have provided sufficient time to
unload the bins.
i acknowledge that the ito contains no observation of any
unloading at cedar springs, no account of the applicant entering any structure
there, and no description of what, if anything, was done with the bins upon
arrival. the ito does not explain or justify the absence of these observations.
nevertheless, the issuing justice was entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from circumstantial facts. importantly, a drug stash would be
valuable and risky to keep on the road. common sense—and the trafficking
pattern documented in the ito—supports the inference that the applicant would
minimize time driving with such items and would secure them promptly before
other activities. while the affiant did not articulate this risk‑management
rationale in the ito, the reasoning was available to the issuing justice as a
matter of common sense: see
r. v. bains
,
2015 onca 677
at para.
157
;
r.
v. thompson
,
2020 onca 361
at para.
11
.
an inference that the applicant did not want to
drive around with the bins is grounded in the record. the applicant went first
to cedar springs, then to walmart for an apparent errand, and later returned to
cedar springs. it is reasonable to infer that something occurred during
the initial stop at the property (it is unlikely the applicant went there for
no reason) and that he did not first go to walmart because the bins were in the
truck.
the broader pattern also supports the conclusion that the stash
moved from 205 hunter to cedar springs. there are salient similarities between
how the applicant used the two locations:
(a)
neither location was the applicant’s residence,
yet he visited both frequently.
(b)
his repeated attendance at each location was
characterized by brief visits averaging under 30 minutes.
(c)
before august 6, the applicant attended 205
hunter before or after conducting an apparent drug transaction on several
occasions. then, on august 6 and 7, he did the same with cedar springs.
from august 6 onward, the ito records a consistent pattern of
attendances at cedar springs (specifically august 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20). although the ito does not state that the applicant never went to
cedar springs before august 6, the absence of earlier observations noted in the
ito is some indication that such visits were not occurring—or at least not with
comparable frequency. when an ito sets out what was observed, there is no
obligation to add what was not observed:
r. v. nguyen
,
2011 onca 465
at
para.
50
. the applicant does not allege that the affiant omitted any relevant
information.
i reach my conclusion without any reliance on the excised statement
that trafficking conduct was “observed directly from” cedar springs. stripped
of that assertion, the remaining facts still permit the inference in question. first,
the bins observed at 205 hunter reasonably contained drugs, paraphernalia, or
proceeds. second, bins were loaded into the applicant’s truck by his associate.
third, the applicant then drove directly to cedar springs for a brief stay
before proceeding to walmart and later returning to cedar springs. that
sequence strongly suggests that the initial stop at cedar springs was
purposeful and related to the bins. fourth, the subsequent attendance pattern
at cedar springs resembled the prior stash-linked pattern at 205 hunter. fifth,
the applicant was no longer observed regularly at 205 hunter and consistently
attended cedar springs. viewed cumulatively, these circumstances allowed the
issuing justice to draw a reasonable inference that the bins—and with them, the
stash—were moved from 205 hunter to cedar springs on august 6.
issue #2: could
the warrant have issued for the entire property?
the second issue is whether the warrant could
have issued for the entire property at 4211 cedar springs. the warrant allowed
the police to search the dwelling house and all outbuildings on the property.
applicant’s position
even if it was reasonable to infer that drugs or
related items would be found at cedar springs, the applicant argues that the
warrant could not have issued for the entire property. as submitted in the
applicant’s factum at paras. 31 and 35:
… the
ito cast a wide net over
the entire nine-acre,
multi-occupant,
mixed-use,
rural property and every single building thereon it
on the basis that it was a
location the applicant, a suspected drug trafficker, frequented. it did not
seek to search a particular residence, building or area, because the police
didn’t have any information connecting the applicant or any alleged criminal
activity to a particular residence, building or area.
…
… permitting
a search of the “dwelling house and all outbuildings” at this address based on
the applicant’s suspected drug dealing and his attendance
somewhere
thereon
is akin to permitting a search of every unit in an apartment building because a
suspected drug dealer frequents the building. [emphasis in original]
legal principles
a warrant must clearly and specifically identify the place to be
searched. this precision is essential for meaningful judicial oversight; it ensures
that the issuing justice understands the scope of the proposed search. without
an adequate description of the place to be searched, the issuing justice cannot
assess whether the authorization being sought would be overbroad. precision then
guides the officers executing the warrant by providing them with clear
parameters and preventing them from relying on their own discretion to
determine where to search. a well-defined location also assists the occupants
of the place being searched. a clear basis for the search can reduce the risk
of confrontation or resistance:
r. v. saint
,
2017 onca 491
at para.
7
;
r.
v. ting,
2016 onca 57
at para.
47
.
in drafting itos that propose to search more than one unit within
a multi-unit dwelling, the affiant must clearly set out reasonable grounds for
each unit to be searched:
r. v. campbell
,
2011 scc 32
at para.
15
.
the applicant relies on the decision of fitzpatrick
j. in
r. v. breton
,
2021 onsc 7312
. that case provides an example of
where an ito needed more precision on the basis to search certain buildings. the warrant could not issue for the entire property because the ito
did not provide reasonable grounds to believe the item sought—a handgun—would
be found in the outbuildings. while the ito supported a search of the accused’s
residence and its immediate surroundings, it lacked specific information
connecting the firearm to the outbuildings. the need for specificity was
heightened by the expansive nature of the property and the potential of it
being shared by multiple people. the judge concluded that the warrant should
have been limited to the residence and its immediate environs.
analysis
i agree with the applicant. based on the
information provided in the ito, the warrant could not have issued for the
entire property at 4211 cedar springs.
an ito does not need to disclose reasonable grounds to believe
that evidence will be found in “each and every possible different place that
the police seek to search”:
breton
at para.
57
. but when the police seek
to search specific structures, the ito must establish reasonable grounds to
believe that evidence will likely be discovered within those structures:
r. v. n.m.
,
2007 canlii 31570
(ont. sup.
ct.) at para.
364
.
the ito failed to articulate a basis to search the
entire property at cedar springs. unlike 205 hunter, the ito contained no
details about the applicant’s activities at cedar springs. the ito only noted
the observations of him attending the property and summarized the tracker data
of his truck. the most precise information came from the satellite views of the
property overlaid with the tracker data from august 19.
that image showed the truck
parked amongst the outbuildings. it did not provide any precision on whether
the applicant attended the dwelling house or any particular outbuilding.
the ito is silent on basic information that
would have been likely available to the police through routine database
searches. for example, the ito does not provide information about property
ownership, any known residents, tenants or businesses (beyond the existence of
a tenant), or any vehicles tied to the property. the ito does not contain any
police intelligence like prior occurrence reports or investigative reports. to be
certain, the test is not whether the police could have conducted a more thorough
investigation. i simply highlight the absence of information to underscore the
inability to draw inferences about which buildings the applicant might have
accessed on the property.
based on the information in the ito, it is fair to
characterize cedar springs as a multi-unit property. multi-unit properties are
not limited to apartment buildings and rooming houses. the ito mentions the
property having a bungalow house and a tenant. it is unclear whether the tenant
was renting a bedroom in the house, a storage unit in the shop, or a stall in
the barn. the ito does not articulate any of these uncertainties. it overlooks
the risk of searching an area that was unavailable to the applicant because an
innocent third party enjoyed exclusive access to it.
a warrant must be tailored to the facts
presented in the ito. where the grounds support a search of one part of a
property but not others, the authorization must be correspondingly limited. in
this case, the ito did not present sufficient information to “throw a net” over
the entire property: see
breton
at para.
57
. there was no
information about which buildings the applicant accessed or whether any part of
the property was under his control. therefore, it could not be said that the
applicant’s space was “connected and overlapping” with those of third parties:
campbell
at para.
15
. the issuing justice required something more than a general
belief that evidence would be found somewhere on the nine-acre property. more precision was required.
conclusion
the warrant could not have issued for “the
dwelling house and all outbuildings” at cedar springs. the respondent does not assert
a warrantless authority for the search. the search therefore breached the
applicant’s
charter
rights under s. 8.
issue #3: should the evidence be excluded?
section 24(2) requires that evidence obtained in a manner
that infringes the
charter
be excluded if it is established
that “having regard to all the circumstances, the admission of it in the
proceedings would bring the administration of justice into disrepute”.
the analysis is evaluated from the perspective of a reasonable person. the
applicant must convince the court that admission of the evidence from 4211
cedar springs would bring the administration of justice into disrepute:
r.
v. mccolman
,
2023 scc 8
at para.
53
.
the s. 24(2) analysis considers three factors: (1)
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing state conduct; (2) the
impact of the breach on the applicant’s
charter
‑protected
interests; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its
merits. the first two factors can only support exclusion of the evidence:
r.
v. le
,
2019 scc 34
at para.
141
. they never support admission—at most, they
can weakly support exclusion:
r. v. zacharias
,
2023 scc 30
at para.
75
;
r.
v. yaghoubi-araghi
,
2025 onca 314
at para.
30
. the third factor, by
contrast, typically supports admission:
le
at para. 142. the balancing of
the factors is a qualitative exercise not capable of mathematical precision:
mccolman
at para.
54
;
r. v. grant
,
2009 scc 32
at para.
140
.
i admit the evidence after examining and
balancing the three factors.
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
conduct
the first factor focuses on the extent to which the
charter
-infringing
conduct deviates from the rule of law. in evaluating the gravity of the infringement,
the court must “situate that conduct on a scale of culpability”:
r. v.
paterson
,
2017 scc 15
at para.
43
. relevant to this
evaluation are the presence of surrounding circumstances that attenuate or
exacerbate the seriousness of the state conduct:
grant
at para.
75
;
mccolman
at para.
58
. however, the absence of additional
charter
breaches
cannot serve to attenuate the breach:
r. v. noel
,
2019 onca 860
at
paras.
18-19
.
it is relevant that the police sought and obtained a search
warrant. as rosenberg j.a. explained in
r. v. rocha
,
2012 onca 707
at
para.
28
:
applying for and obtaining a search warrant from an
independent judicial officer is the antithesis of wilful disregard of
charter
rights.
… unless the applicant for exclusion of evidence can show that the warrant was
obtained through use of false or deliberately misleading information, or the
drafting of the ito in some way subverted the warrant process, the obtaining of
the warrant generally, as i explain below, tells in favour of admitting the
evidence. in this case, the police submitted the fruits of their investigation
to a justice of the peace who granted the warrants. … the warrant should not
have been granted in relation to the house,
but it must be remembered that
an independent judicial officer did authorize the search
. [emphasis added]
i do not put much weight on the mere act of seeking a warrant. this
is not a case where it was uncertain whether a warrant was required but the
police sought one to be cautious. there is no suggestion that a warrantless
search was in the realm of possibility.
i put more weight on my assessment of the ito. i find that it was,
for the most part, not misleading. it does not approach the side of the
spectrum reserved for the intentional use of false or misleading information:
rocha
at para.
29
. instead, i find that the affiant was reasonably diligent and
mindful of his duty to make full and frank disclosure:
r.
v. morelli
,
2010 scc 8
at para.
100
.
in making this finding of fact, i appreciate
that i excised this overtly false statement: “observations indicative of drug
trafficking have been observed directly from the property [at 4211 cedar
springs]”. the unfortunate decision to include such a bald assertion
must be considered in its proper context. the issuing justice
would have diligently reviewed the entire ito:
r. v. victoria
,
2018 onca
69
at para.
97
. the affiant otherwise set out all underlying facts supporting his
beliefs. it is unlikely that a single unsupported statement would have misled
the issuing justice, given that other assertions were substantiated by factual
detail.
there is no suggestion that the affiant omitted material information. the ito
spanned 82 pages. one false statement, in the context of an otherwise fairly
and accurately drafted ito, does not undermine my conclusion that the affiant
acted without wilful or reckless disregard for
charter
rights.
the affiant could have potentially simplified
the task for the issuing justice by including more precise tracker data. that
data
might
have supported the inference about moving the stash by
showing that the applicant had not visited cedar springs until after august 6
(the day that he allegedly moved the stash). the failure to include this
information arguably undermined the affiant’s obligation to make full
disclosure. however, i do not use this failure to find the breach more serious.
there is no suggestion that the affiant omitted tracker data that would have undermined
the inference of moving the stash. the information was thus neutral or would
have supported the warrant. whatever the case, the affiant was not holding back
information in the hopes that it would improve the prospects of issuance. there
was no bad faith.
the applicant points to the absence of certain investigative
steps taken by the police.
for example, i highlighted at para. 52 of these reasons the absence of
information about the property that might have been available to the police. however,
there is no guarantee that such information would have assisted on the issue of
what buildings could be searched. i cannot say that its absence aggravates the
breach. overall, the police conducted a thorough investigation, as was
summarized in the ito.
it is relevant that this ito did not completely miss the mark. it
established reasonable grounds to believe that drugs or related items would be
found at cedar springs. the issue was the breadth of the search. the affiant
failed to demonstrate grounds to search particular buildings on the property. i
am not suggesting that this issue is insignificant. i outlined at para. 46 the
importance of precision; see also
r. v. aboukhamis
,
2015 onsc 2860
at paras.
43-48
. but in situating the breach
on a scale, the police conduct is less culpable given that their investigation had
accomplished the crucial first step of establishing reasonable grounds to find
drugs on the property.
another attenuating surrounding circumstance is that the police accurately
laid out for the issuing justice exactly what they wanted to do. the affiant specified
the request to search “the dwelling house and all outbuildings”, as opposed to
a vague request to search “the premises”. combined with the
description of the property and the satellite imagery in the ito, the affiant
put the issuing justice in a strong position to independently decide whether to
issue the warrants. the police then acted in accordance with the power bestowed
upon them by the issuing justice, which weakens the concern pressed by the
applicant that they disregarded the privacy interests of potential third
parties.
i find that the first factor supports exclusion to a degree below
moderate.
the impact of the breach on the
applicant’s
charter
-protected interests
the second factor is aimed at a concern that admitting
evidence after a breach may send a message that
charter
rights
are nothing more than high-minded principles. the court must evaluate the
extent to which the breach “actually undermined the interests protected by the
right infringed”:
grant
at para.
76
. the impact on the
individual ranges from fleeting and technical on one end to profoundly
intrusive on the other:
mccolman
at para.
66
.
the affidavit filed by the applicant contains additional relevant
facts. on the day of the applicant’s arrest, the police found keys for cedar
springs in his truck. the keys opened the main locked door leading into the
interior of the northeast storage garage as well as the second door entering
the main part of the building where the police found the evidence.
there is no evidence that the applicant controlled any residence on the
property.
the execution of an unlawful search warrant would not have been a
trivial interference with the applicant’s privacy rights. the intrusion would
not have been fleeting. the applicant demonstrated his expectation of privacy
when he sought to exclude others by locking the doors and keeping the keys in
his possession.
on the other hand, the search was not an invasive breach of the
applicant’s privacy rights. the police did not search any digital devices. the
property was not the applicant’s residence. while he went there frequently, the
duration of his visits averaged under 30 minutes. he was therefore not using
the property as an office in any traditional sense. the most reasonable
inference is that the applicant was going there to pick things up and drop them
off—he was using it for storage. he could have also been visiting someone.
it may very well be that the police improperly searched the
residence of an unrelated third party. but i do not have specific evidence on
that point. in any event, i am meant to focus on how the breach impacted the
applicant’s
charter
-protected interests.
i find that the second factor moderately supports exclusion.
society’s interest in the
adjudication of the case on its merits
the third factor asks whether the truth-seeking function of the
criminal trial process would be better served by the admission or exclusion of
the evidence. courts should consider such factors as the reliability of the
evidence, the importance of the evidence to the crown’s case, and the
seriousness of the alleged offences:
mccolman
at paras.
69-73
.
the police found the following evidence at cedar springs that was
allegedly possessed by the applicant:
(a)
a prohibited firearm with ammunition;
(b)
952 grams of cocaine;
(c)
6.89 kilograms of mdma;
(d)
2561 oxycodone pills (tested as protonitazene); and
(e)
33 kilograms of cannabis.
excluding the evidence would undermine the truth-seeking function
of the trial. the evidence is reliable and vital to much of the crown’s case.
the applicant faces multiple serious charges. drugs and guns present a serious and
ongoing societal problem, especially here in hamilton. society looks to the
courts to recognize the day-to-day danger caused by the combination of drugs
and guns:
r. v. mengesha
,
2022
onca 654
at para.
14
.
i recognize that the seriousness of the charges
cannot overwhelm the analysis:
r. v. s.b.
,
2014 onca 527
at paras.
34-35
;
r. v. harrison
,
2009 scc 34
at para.
34
. the public has a vital
interest in having a justice system that is above reproach, particularly where
the stakes are high for the applicant. nevertheless, society’s interest
in a trial on the merits is exceedingly high in all the circumstances.
i find that the third factor strongly supports admission.
balancing the factors
the cumulative weight of the first two factors must be balanced
against the third. the police conduct was not egregious. the breach did not
severely intrude on the applicant’s
charter
-protected interests. and the
evidence is highly reliable and vital to the truth-seeking function of a trial.
this is not a case in which either of the first two factors—let
alone both—
strongly
supports exclusion. as noted in
r. v. mcguffie
,
2016 onca 365
at para.
63
, the third factor becomes important when one, but not
both, of the first two factors strongly supports exclusion of the evidence. in
this instance, exclusion is not required for me to adequately disassociate the
justice system from the breach or to reinforce the community’s commitment to
individual rights: see
mcguffie
at para.
83
.
i find that this comment from the ontario court of appeal in
mengesha
at para.
15
applies in this
case: “these offences are so serious that, when the three factors are balanced,
the evidence must be included. exclusion would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute”.
conclusion
the warrant could not have issued for the entire property at 4211
cedar springs. the search breached the applicant’s
charter
rights under
s. 8. however, the evidence found during the search is admissible at the
applicant’s trial.
released:  december
2, 2025
signed:
justice davin m.k. garg
specifically, the offence under s. 5(2) of the
cdsa
.
see for e.g., submissions, november 6, 2025 at pp. 22-23, 27-29.
ito at para. 70(d).
ito at para. 70(e).
ito at para. 70(k).
ito at para. 72(v).
ito at para. 80(a)(i). i read the material sentence as saying that
the applicant attended the property every day during that period except august
14. i take no issue with the affiant treating the gmc sierra truck and the
applicant as one and the same. applicant’s counsel did not suggest any concern.
tracker data, standing alone, could not put the applicant in the truck. however,
the ito as a whole established a very strong and consistent connection between
the applicant and the truck. even if the applicant was not the driver on a
given occasion, the pattern associated with the truck remained probative to the
inference of drugs being on the property.
ito at p. 79.
the applicant also challenges the affiant’s belief that that cedar
springs was a stash house and that evidence of drug trafficking would be
located therein. this challenge is not about correcting the ito but whether the
warrant could have issued. i deal with this challenge under issue #1.
submissions, september 23, 2025 at pp. 23, 36 (“i think
there may be an inference about what’s at hunter. but where this starts to fall
apart is you can’t draw the inference as to what’s at cedar springs”).
submissions, november 6, 2025 at p. 24.
see for e.g., submissions, november 6, 2025 at pp. 24-26.
see the respondent’s factum at para. 28 for the colour version of
these images.
i do not characterize the request to search the entire property as an unsubstantiated
assertion.
see for e.g., submissions, september 23, 2025 at p. 56.
i do not view this as the absence of an additional breach; see
noel
at
paras.
18-19
. rather, the police committed a less serious version of the same
breach.
the applicant was content to rely on the disclosure for the purposes of the
charter
application.
submissions, september 23, 2025 at p. 61.
the police found evidence at other locations that might have allowed some of
the charges to continue.