ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. eagen
, 2025 oncj 687
date:
2025 12 23
court
file no.:  central west (peel) region 998-2331112342
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ryan eagen
before
justice
r. tomovski
ruling
on s. 11(b)
charter
application
heard
on december 16, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 23, 2025
lawrence eikelboom......................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ryan eagen……………….……………...……………………………….. on
his own behalf
tomovski j.:
i.         introduction
the applicant’s first trial was scheduled to
proceed below the
jordan
presumptive ceiling.  however, the trial did
not proceed and is currently scheduled to proceed above the presumptive ceiling.
the key issues in dispute are who is responsible for
the adjournment of the first trial and whether and how the ensuing delay
between the first and second trial should be apportioned.
the applicant brings an application pursuant to
s. 11(b) of the
charter
, alleging a breach of his right to be tried
within a reasonable time.  he seeks a stay of proceedings.  the applicant
argues that the first trial was adjourned because of disclosure and, what he refers
to as, “restructuring” issues and, therefore, the ensuing delay to the second
trial should be attributed as crown or court delay.
the crown argues that the first trial was
adjourned at the applicant’s request because of his dissatisfaction with the s.
486.3 court-appointed lawyer’s conduct leading up to the trial, which the trial
judge held was unfounded.  as a result, the crown argues that the entire delay between
the first and second trial is defence delay.
for my reasons that follow, i allow the
application.  i find that once defence delay is deducted from the total delay,
the net delay is above the presumptive ceiling and the crown has failed to rebut
the presumption of unreasonableness and prove the existence of exceptional
circumstances justifying the delay.  although the first trial was adjourned at
the request of the applicant because of his misplaced distrust of the
court-appointed lawyer and request that a new lawyer be appointed, the crown
and court failed to try to minimize the ensuing delay in setting the second
trial resulting in the delay being apportioned between the crown and the
applicant.
ii.         background
the applicant is self represented.  he is
charged with criminally harassing the complainant between october 5 and
november 2, 2023.  the information was sworn on november 6, 2023.  the anticipated
end of trial is april 30, 2026, the third day of a three-day trial.  as a
result, the total delay is 906 days or 29 months, which is well over the
jordan
presumptive ceiling for unreasonable delay of 18 months for a trial in the
ontario court of justice, when the crown has elected to proceed summarily,
which it has in this case.
for analytical clarity, the history of the
proceedings can be divided into three phases: the setting of the first trial,
the adjournment of the first trial, and the setting of the second trial.
a.
the setting of the first trial
the applicable period is from when the
information was sworn on november 6, 2023, to the start of the first trial on
april 29, 2024.
the applicant was charged on november 15 and
given a first court date of november 28.  he appeared in court on november 28
and then on december 19 and was advised by the crown each time that disclosure
was still being vetted.  on december 19, rather than insisting on receipt of disclosure
before setting a pretrial, the applicant was proactive and requested that a
judicial pretrial be set.  the presiding justice obliged and set the earliest
available pretrial of february 20, 2024.  following completion of the judicial pretrial,
the case was adjourned at the applicant’s request to march 28 and then april 11
to consider the crown’s resolution offer.
the applicant was first advised on march 28 that
if the case did not resolve, and proceeded to trial, the crown would seek to
have a lawyer appointed to cross-examine the complainant pursuant to
s. 486.3(2)
of the
criminal code
.
at the april 11 court appearance, the applicant declined
the resolution offer and confirmed his intention to proceed to trial.  the
court advised that it was “too late in the day to set a trial date”.  no time
was noted, and no reason was given for why it was too late.  the case was
adjourned to april 18 to set a trial date.  before the case was adjourned, the
applicant stated that he believed disclosure was incomplete.  however, he did
not identify at that time which items he believed were missing.
like the preceding court date, the applicant was
advised that he could not set a trial date, this time because an officer, who
was required to be present to set the date, had already left for the day.  the
applicant reiterated his belief that disclosure was incomplete.  the case was
adjourned to april 22, but before it was, the judge made an order appointing a
lawyer to cross-examine the complainant.  when asked for his comment before the
order was made, the applicant stated, “i don’t really think i need to be honest…i
guess i’ll have one in case”.
the trial scheduling appearance occurred on
april 22.  the first date offered by the court for a two-day trial was the
following year on april 29-30, 2025.  the date fell just below the
jordan
presumptive ceiling.  the order appointing counsel was confirmed as having been
previously made.  the applicant provided his telephone number and email address
and was told he would be sent a copy of the order.  the case was adjourned to
january 30, 2025 to allow time for the court-appointed lawyer to contact the
applicant.  the applicant did not make any reference to the missing disclosure
at this time.
at the january 30 court appearance, a representative
of the court-appointed lawyer attended and advised that they had reached out to
the applicant and had not heard back.  the representative and the applicant
exchanged information and confirmed the lawyer would get in contact with the
applicant before trial.  the applicant referenced a
mcneil
report that
was outstanding.  the crown promised to follow up.  no other items of
disclosure were referenced by the applicant.  the case was adjourned to the
first day of trial.
b.
the adjournment of the first trial
the trial did not proceed as scheduled on april 29,
2025.  on that date, the applicant sought an adjournment and a new
court-appointed lawyer because he lost confidence in the lawyer initially
appointed by the court (pp. 11 and 24 of the april 29, 2025 and p. 3 of the may
29, 2025 transcripts).  the basis for the applicant’s request was that, in
advance of the trial, he asked the lawyer to find out the crown’s current resolution
position and when the applicant was told the position, and did not accept it, he
believed the lawyer had colluded with the crown, which he felt compromised both
the lawyer’s ability to act at trial and the applicant’s right to a fair trial.
the trial judge granted the adjournment even
though the crown was ready to proceed to trial, including the complainant being
present.  although the trial judge did not find any impropriety on the lawyer’s
part, he found it was in the interests of justice that the applicant has
confidence in any court-appointed lawyer. the judge stated (at p. 2):
the reason i’m
gonna adjourn this case is i’m concerned, not that there’s any reality to a
suggestion that 486 counsel in this case has done anything inappropriate
because i highly doubt that she has done anything inappropriate.  but, and
notwithstanding the fact that 486 counsel is not counsel to the accused, it is
in the interests of justice that there be some level of at least an absence of
inappropriate distrust between 486 counsel and the accused…[n]ot that 486
counsel did anything wrong here
having granted the adjournment, the trial judge
took on a case management role to oversee several outstanding issues including appointing
a new 486.3 lawyer, increasing the trial estimate to three days based on late
charter
motions filed by the applicant, including on the morning of trial, that had not
been factored into the original time estimate, and scheduling a potential disclosure
motion.  the judge adjourned the case to may 29 for a judicial pretrial and for
a new trial date to be set.
regarding the
mcneil
report referenced by
the applicant at the january 30 court appearance, the crown confirmed it was
previously disclosed to the applicant but agreed to share another copy.
c.
the setting of the second trial
before the first trial was adjourned, the trial
judge directed that a new date be set “as quickly as possible”.
the trial scheduling appearance occurred on may
29.  the first date offered by the court for a three-day trial was june 18-20,
2025.  however, this date could not be set because rules 3.1 and 2.6,
respectively, of the
criminal rules
of the ontario court of justice require
service 30 days in advance of the applicant’s disclosure motion being heard (i.e.,
june 28, 2025) and the motion being heard 30 days prior to trial (i.e., july
28, 2025).  the next date offered by the court was april 13-15, 2026, ten
months after the first trial, which was available to the applicant and the
crown and set as the current trial date.
at the time the first trial was cancelled (april
29) and when the trial was rescheduled (may 29), a s. 11(b) waiver was not
canvassed with the applicant nor was he advised of the consequences of seeking
an adjournment of the first trial.
a s. 11(b)
charter
application was
scheduled and proceeded before me on december 16, 2025.  i reserved my reasons
to december 23.
iii.        analysis
a.
the
jordan
framework
the supreme court in
r. v.
jordan
,
2016 scc 27
outlined the framework by which delay is to be assessed under s.
11(b) of the
charter
.  the framework as it applies to the ontario court
of justice is summarized as follows.
there is a presumptive ceiling of 18 months:
jordan
at paras.
5, 46, 49, and 105
.  delay above that mark is presumptively
unreasonable, whereas delay below it is presumptively reasonable: at paras.
47-48, 68, 82 and 105.
delay is considered and calculated in different
ways at different stages of the framework.  at the outset, the total delay must
be calculated.  this period is calculated from the date of the charge to the
end of the trial:
jordan
at para.
60
.  the former equates with the date
the information is sworn: see
r. v. allison
,
2022 onca 329
at paras.
35-43
;
r. v. kalanj
,
1989 canlii 63 (scc)
.
defence delay is subtracted from the total
delay:
jordan
at paras.
49, 60, and 66
.
defence delay can result from an explicit or
implicit waiver or delay caused solely or directly by the defence’s conduct:
jordan
at paras.
61, 63 and 66
.  an example of the latter is when the crown and court
are ready to proceed but the defence is not: at para. 64.  however, legitimate
defence conduct is not defence delay: at para. 65.
when the delay is above the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the crown to establish the presence of exceptional circumstances
that justify the delay:
jordan
at paras.
47, 68, 81 and 105
.
exceptional circumstances are circumstances that are reasonably unforeseen or
reasonably unavoidable and the ensuing delay emanating from those circumstances
cannot reasonably be remedied by the crown:
jordan
at para.
69
.  the crown
must show that it took reasonable steps to avoid the delay before the
presumptive ceiling was surpassed: at para. 70.  those steps need not be
successful in preventing the delay: at para. 70.
generally, exceptional circumstances fall into
two groups: discrete events or particularly complex cases:
jordan
at
para.
71
.  the former includes medical emergencies or unexpected illnesses,
whereas the latter includes cases with novel or complicated legal issues, voluminous
disclosure or many witnesses requiring a lengthy trial: at paras. 77-78.  like
defence delay, delay caused by exceptional circumstances is subtracted from the
total delay: at para. 75.
when the delay is below the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the applicant to show that the delay is otherwise unreasonable
by establishing that it “took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained
effort to expedite the proceedings” and the case took “markedly longer than it
reasonably should have”:
jordan
at paras.
48, 82 and 105
.
meaningful and sustained steps include seeking
and setting the earliest available trial dates and giving notice when delay is
becoming a problem:
jordan
at para.
85
.  whether a case took markedly
longer considers multiple factors including the case’s complexity, local
considerations, and whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the
proceedings: at para. 87.
stays beneath the presumptive ceiling will be
granted only in clear cases:
jordan
at para.
83
.
b.
jordan
applied
the total delay in the applicant’s case is from november
6, 2023 (the date the information was sworn) to april 30, 2026 (the anticipated
end of trial).  the total delay is 906 days or 29 months.
i.
exclusively defence delay
i find there are three periods of delay that are
exclusively defence delay and are to be deducted from the total delay.
first, following completion of the february 20,
2024 judicial pretrial, the applicant sought multiple adjournments to consider the
crown’s resolution offer.  it was not until april 11 that the applicant declined
the crown’s offer and requested to set a trial date.  i accept the crown’s
concession that one week is an appropriate period of time following the
judicial pretrial for the applicant to consider the resolution offer.  less one
week, i find this period is defence delay.  subtracting this 44-day period from
the total delay of 906 days leaves a net delay of 862 days.
the second period is from april 11 to 18, 2024.
the case had returned on april 11 for resolution but because the applicant
unexpectedly changed course and requested to set a trial, the court was unable
to accommodate the request on short notice.  the case was adjourned to april 18
to set the trial date.  i find this period is defence delay.  subtracting this 7-day
period from the net delay of 862 days leaves a net delay of 855 days.
i do not find the period from april 18 to 22 to
be defence delay.  the applicant was present in court on april 18 when his case
was called but the officer, who sets the date on behalf of the crown, had
already left for the day.  the applicant was ready to set a trial date, but the
crown was not.  in those circumstances, the ensuing delay to april 22 to set a
trial date is not defence delay.
the third period of exclusively defence delay is
from may 29 to july 28, 2025.  after the first trial was adjourned at the
applicant’s request on may 29, the latter date is the earliest the second trial
could have proceeded while still allowing for the applicant to comply with the
notice and time requirements under the
criminal rules
in order to
advance his disclosure motion, a motion he chose not to file in advance of the
first trial but only after the first trial was cancelled.  subtracting this 60-day
period from the net delay of 855 days leaves a net delay of 795 days.
ii.         not
exclusively defence delay
this period is from july 28, 2025 to april 30,
2026, which is the earliest a second trial could have proceeded to the
anticipated end of the current trial.  after having considered all relevant
circumstances, i find apportioning this 276-period of delay between the
applicant and the crown and court is warranted based on the principle in
r.
v. hanan
,
2023 scc 12
.
in
hanan
, at para.
9
, the supreme court
rejected a bright-line rule of attributing all of the ensuing delay to the
defence after the rejection of an initial date because of unavailability.
instead, a contextual analysis was emphasized in which all relevant
circumstances are to be considered to determine whether and how the ensuing
delay should be apportioned: see also
r. v. m.e.
,
2025 onca 729
at
paras.
17-18 and 26
;
r. v. jacques-taylor
,
2024 onca 458
at paras.
5-7
;
r.
v. shaporov
,
2025 onca 281
at para.
33
; and
r. v. jones
,
2025 onca
103
at para.
33
.  relevant circumstances include the reason for the need to
reschedule and whether it was caused by the defence; the extent to which the
defence was available; and the reasons for the defence unavailability:
r. v.
bowen-wright
,
2024 onsc 293
at paras.
38-48
.
in
r. v. k.d.
,
2025 onca 639
, the court
of appeal clarified the application of
hanan
.   at para. 46, van rensburg
j.a. noted, “it is not that the apportionment of delay is warranted in every
case, but rather that the circumstances of every case must be considered to
determine whether apportionment is warranted”.  in
jones
, supra, at
para.
32
, the court of appeal further clarified that
hanan
did not
“adopt an inverse bright-line rule apportioning the defence with none of the
delay”.
apportionment of delay based on the principle in
hanan
has been applied to different situations.
hanan
, itself, involved
apportioning delay caused by the need to reschedule a trial because of crown fault.
k.d.
and
jacques-taylor
, supra, both involved apportioning delay in
the scheduling of an initial trial date, which involved no fault: see also
r.
v. r.w.
,
2025 onsc 2297
at paras.
42-47
.
m.e.
, supra, involved
apportioning delay both in the scheduling of an initial trial date and in
scheduling a trial continuation date.
jones
, supra, involved apportioning
delay in the scheduling of a judicial pretrial, which involved no fault: see
paras. 22-36.
a contextual approach permits apportioning delay
in situations where the court has limited availability for large periods of
time.  as noted by van rensburg j.a. in
k.d.
, supra, at para.
45
:
[t]he defence
cannot fairly and reasonably be held wholly responsible for a span of time
largely comprising a period where the court was unavailable.  this is so even
if the period of delay began because the defence was not available on the first
date offered
in the applicant’s case, the first date
offered was the only date offered.  the court was otherwise unavailable for
nine months when rescheduling the trial.
the contextual approach in apportioning delay is
not contingent on exceptional circumstances or crown delay having caused the need
for another date.  this approach was expressly rejected in
k.d.
at
para.
46
, van rensburg j.a., stated:
[t]he crown
sought to limit the applicability of apportionment pursuant to
hanan
to
cases where the need for continuation dates was caused by an exceptional
circumstance. however, nothing in
hanan
limits the principle that
“’[a]ll relevant circumstances should be considered to determine how delay
should be apportioned among the participants”
in applying the guidance from
hanan
and
subsequent cases to the period from july 28, 2025 to april 30, 2026 (the
earliest the second trial could have proceeded to the anticipated end of the second
trial), i must consider all relevant circumstances in deciding whether, and
how, to apportion the delay.  relevant factors, as referenced, include the
reason for the need to reschedule and whether it was caused by the defence and
court availability in rescheduling the trial.
the crown argues the entire period between the
adjournment of the first trial to the second is defence delay, because the applicant’s
actions solely caused the need for an adjournment.  he further argues that the adjournment
was necessitated by the applicant’s misplaced distrust of the court-appointed
lawyer and his request that a new lawyer be appointed.  although i agree the
applicant’s actions solely caused the adjournment of the trial, i find the
crown’s submission in asking for the entire delay to be attributed to the applicant
indicative of the bright-line approach that was rejected in
hanan
.  i
find the crown’s position fails to account for the crown’s and court’s ongoing
responsibility in trying to minimize delay, even when the crown and court are
not responsible for the adjournment.
turning first to the reasons i find the
applicant was the sole cause of the adjournment of the first trial.  pursuant
to
s. 486.3
of the
criminal code
, a court-appointed lawyer is not
appointed to represent an accused but is appointed to cross-examine a witness:
see
r. v. n.h.
,
2023 onca 586
at para.
3
;
r. v. b.n.
,
2025 onca
534
at para.
13
;
r. v. mcquarrie
,
2024 onsc 2716
at para.
56
; and
r.
v. thornton
,
2014 onsc 6688
at paras.
50-51
.  despite this limited role, the
applicant directed the court-appointed lawyer to contact the crown to get the crown’s
resolution position.  after having been advised of the position and declined
it, the applicant suggested the lawyer had colluded with the crown which compromised
his right to a fair trial.
i agree with the trial judge’s finding that the court-appointed
lawyer did not act inappropriately.  i find the lawyer acted in good faith as a
conduit between the applicant and the crown.  the applicant cannot benefit,
even unintentionally, from the delay his own request for a trial adjournment
caused when it was the applicant who directed the lawyer to engage in conduct on
his behalf that was outside the scope of the lawyer’s appointment.
the trial was not adjourned because of any
disclosure or restructuring issues as argued by the applicant.  regarding the
former, it is unclear what, if any, items were outstanding at the time of the
first trial.  the applicant’s materials on this application did not include any
written requests for disclosure.  further, the applicant did not seek to
justify an adjournment of the trial on the basis of outstanding disclosure.  regarding
the latter, it was only after the applicant requested a new lawyer be appointed
and the adjournment was granted that the trial judge assumed the role of case
management judge to address any outstanding or “restructuring” issues in
advance of a new trial.  it is only then, as well, that the applicant requested
that a disclosure motion be set.
turning next to the reasons i find apportioning some
of the delay in rescheduling the trial to the crown and court is warranted.  in
oral submissions, the crown argued that the principle in
hanan
has no
application in this case, because, unlike
hanan
, where the crown’s tactical
decision caused an adjournment of the trial, the applicant was the sole cause
of the adjournment of the first trial.  i do not agree.  i find the crown’s
submission advocates for a categorical approach to the apportionment of delay
and takes a narrow view of the principle in
hanan
.
in oral submissions i posited a hypothetical scenario
to the crown in which an accused is the cause of a trial adjournment, and the first
date offered by the court for a new trial is two, three or even four years
away.  on the crown’s approach to apportionment, because the accused caused the
adjournment, all ensuing delay would be attributed as defence delay.  the crown
agreed, however, that, based on the hypothetical, namely, the considerable gap
between the cancelled trial date and the new date offered, it would be unreasonable
to attribute the entire ensuing delay to the accused. the crown further agreed
that determining how much the gap must close before the entire delay is
attributed as defence delay is not a mathematical formula.
because the applicant was the sole cause of the
adjournment of the first trial, i find it is appropriate to apportion a
significant portion of the ensuing delay to the applicant.  however, as
referenced, i find it is warranted to apportion a portion of the delay in
rescheduling the trial to the crown and court.  the applicant was always available
and accepted the first date offered by the court every time his case was
adjourned including when the second trial was scheduled.  further, the first
date offered by the court after july 28, 2025 (the earliest the second trial
could have proceeded while still allowing compliance with the
criminal rules
)
was april 28-30 2026, nine months later.  this is despite the trial judge, when
adjourning the first trial, directing that the second trial be rescheduled “as
quickly as possible”.  a trial date offered nine months later, which placed the
total delay at 29 months, is not indicative of any attempt by the crown and
court to try to minimize delay.  the crown conceded in oral submissions that it
did not take any steps to prioritize the rescheduling of the trial.
in the circumstances, of the 276 days from july
28, 2025 to april 30, 2026, i find it appropriate and reasonable to apportion 207
days as defence delay (75%) and the remaining 69 days as non-defence delay (25%).
subtracting this 207-day period from the net delay of 795 days leaves a net
delay of 588 days or 19.3 months: see
r. v. shaikh
,
2019 onca 895
at
footnote 2 for a conversion of actual days to months.
iii.
absence of exceptional circumstances
even after accounting for the adjournment of the
first trial, and the related delay attributed to the applicant in rescheduling
the trial, the net delay remains above the presumptive ceiling.  as such, the
onus falls on the crown to rebut the presumption of unreasonableness.  neither
in its written materials or in oral submissions, did the crown argue in the
alternative that an above-the-ceiling delay was justified because of the
presence of exceptional circumstances.  despite this, i will briefly outline
the reasons i find the presumption has not been rebutted.
the applicant’s case is not a complex one.  it
is a relatively straightforward prosecution.  one charge and one complainant.  the
crown has not suggested there are any novel or complex legal issues.  although
the applicant has filed
charter
applications, they are, in the crown’s
view, frivolous and ought to be summarily dismissed.
recently, the court of appeal in
r. v. singh
,
2025 onca 843
, granted a crown appeal of a s. 11(b) above-the-ceiling stay because
the trial judge erred in his assessment of exceptional circumstances in “focusing
narrowly on the relative simplicity of the individual charges” and overlooking the
complexity of the prosecution.  in addition to other relevant factors,
singh
was a large and complex project case involving multiple accused and voluminous
disclosure.  unlike
singh
, the applicant’s case is neither complex nor large.
neither is it a project prosecution.  the applicant is the lone accused.  there
is no suggestion that disclosure is voluminous.
as referenced earlier, the crown and court did
not take any steps to minimize the delay once the presumptive ceiling was
breached, including any steps to prioritize the rescheduling of the trial.  this
is despite the trial judge’s direction to schedule the second trial as quickly
as possible.  an offered trial date of 9 months away is not timely in the
circumstances especially when it means a total delay of 29 months.
it is unfortunate that this charge cannot be
adjudicated on its merits due to unreasonable delay.
iv.      conclusion
the application is allowed.  the charge is
stayed.
released:  december 23, 2025
signed:
justice tomovski