ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. batchilly
, 2025 oncj 152
date:
2025 03 17
court
file no.:  toronto region
24-48125201
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
muhammed batchilly
before
justice cidalia c.g. faria
heard
on march 14, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 17, 2025
nicholas burrell.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
chris hynes................................... counsel
for the defendant muhammed batchilly
faria j.:
i.
introduction
muhammed batchilly is charged with the offence
of assault with a weapon and possessing this weapon in contravention of a
release order contrary to
ss. 267
(a) and
145 (5)
(a) of the
criminal code
.
on march 14, 2025, he had a very short trial
before me. the crown called one witness and filed four photos as exhibits. mr.
batchilly testified in his own defence.
the defence conceded date, identity,
jurisdiction, and that mr. batchilly was on a release not to be in possession
of a weapon at the time of the alleged assault with a weapon.
ii.
evidence summary
aseef khan testified for the crown. on august
17, 2024, he went to the galleria supermarket in toronto to buy eggs. he heard
a commotion, and glass shattering. when he approached the checkout area, he saw
2 female and 1 male store staff trying to hold mr. batchilly. one store staff
member, the male, grabbed mr. batchilly, demonstrated to be like a bear hug, after
mr. batchilly had knocked additional products to the ground. the two men tussled.
the store staff member forced mr. batchilly into a chair. mr. batchilly’s feet
were bleeding.
mr. khan observed mr. batchilly sitting in the
chair and use a knife to “shave stuff” off the bottom of his bleeding feet. mr.
khan assumed that mr. batchilly had stepped on the shards of glass he had seen
on the floor of the grocery store.
the male staff member who had placed mr.
batchilly in the chair after the tussle left the area and returned with paper
towels and a first aid kit. he approached mr. batchilly.
mr. khan testified he saw mr. batchilly raise
the knife he was using on his feet to chest height, and holding it with bended
elbow, he said “get away from me”. the male staff member threw band aides at
mr. batchilly and backed away.
police were called, they attended, they arrested
mr. batchilly and took a statement from mr. khan.
mr. khan recalls hearing mr. batchilly asking
for a receipt in varying amounts, $50, $100, and $200. he testified that mr.
batchilly never got up from his chair and did not “protrude” the knife forward,
and that the store member approached slowly when he returned with the medical
supplies.
none of this evidence is in dispute.
mr. batchilly testified he suffers from a brain
injury and takes medication for a bi-polar diagnosis. he testifies he shopped
at galleria supermarket often and wanted a receipt for a previous purchase. he
recalls getting scared and either throwing or dropping a juice bottle. he testified
the store staff put their hands on him, they dragged him around and his feet
were bleeding.
he had a knife he uses to cut oranges and mangos
and he was using it on his feet to “scrape it off”, presumably the glass he had
just walked on that caused the bleeding. he wanted to “scare them away from me”
as they had pushed him, and “when they see the knife they stay away”. he
testified he had no intention of hurting anyone, he did not attack anyone, and
he was not “wielding” the knife, though he admits he talks with his hands.
when asked how he felt, mr. batchilly testified he
was disappointed and hurt that the staff called the police rather than an
ambulance to help with his bleeding feet. “they pushed me and dragged me and i
was walking on glass on the floor”.
iii.
position of the parties
the crown submits it has proven every element of
the offences, and that there was no threat to mr. batchilly, so his response,
to lift the knife in his hand, was not reasonable in the circumstances as self-defence.
the defence submits that the crown did not call
the person to whom mr. batchilly spoke to when he had the knife in his hand,
and so has not proven the elements of assault with a weapon.
in the alternative, mr. batchilly’s response to
the approach of the person who had grabbed him, moved him over shards of glass
causing his feet to bleed, and forced him into a chair, was a reasonable
apprehension of a threat, and his response, to raise the knife, which he
acknowledges became a weapon at that moment, and say “get away from me” is self-defence.
iv.
legal principles
mr. batchilly is presumed innocent. the onus is
on the crown to prove every element of both offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
this is a high standard of proof that lies “much closer to absolute certainty than
to a balance of probabilities”,
r. v. starr
,
2000 scc 40 (canlii)
, 2 s.c.r. 144 at
para.
242
.
i must consider the credibility and reliability
of the witness evidence. credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking
the truth as they know it, and reliability relates to the actual accuracy of
the testimony.
section
265(1)(b)
of the
criminal code
defines an assault is when a person:
(b)
attempts or threatens, by an act or
a gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes that other
person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability to effect
his purpose
an assault with a weapon per
s.
267
(a)
is when committing an assault,
the person:
(a)
carries, uses,
or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation thereof.
v.
analysis
both witnesses, mr. khan for the crown, and mr.
batchilly on his own behalf are credible. it is not in dispute that they both
testified to what they believe to be true.
mr. khan was straight-forward, and clear about
what he saw, easily admitted what assumptions he made and reasons he made them.
he also admitted that he observed only part of the interaction between mr.
batchilly and the staff, about 6 minutes of 10 minutes, he estimated.
mr. batchilly testified to the best of his
ability given his challenges with his brain injury, his mental health condition,
and his medication. certainly, the crown did not submit, nor do i find, that
mr. batchilly was untruthful to the court.
reliability, the essential elements of the
offence, and self-defence are the issues.
assault with a weapon
i find mr. khan reliable. he was close to both
mr. batchilly and the person alleged to be the victim of the assault with the
weapon. he saw the tussle, saw mr. batchilly being forced onto a chair, the
staff member leave and come back with medical supplies. he saw the staff member
approach mr. batchilly slowly, then back away when mr. batchilly raised the
knife, and told him to “get away”. he saw the staff member throw band-aids at
mr. batchilly.
it is clear mr. khan saw and perceived mr.
batchilly to be using the knife as a weapon and to intimidate the staff member
when he raised if from his feet to chest height and at the same time told him
to get away.
however, there is no evidence from the staff member
that he saw the knife raised, and he perceived it the same way. there is no
direct evidence that mr. batchilly’s gesture caused the staff member to believe
on reasonable grounds that mr. batchilly had “the present ability to effect his
purpose”, an essential element of the offence.
the crown asks the court to make this inference based
on the evidence that the staff member approached mr. batchilly slowly and then
backed away when the knife was raised.
that is a reasonable inference.
however even if the staff member saw the knife
mr. batchilly was using to shave off shards of glass from his feet, there is no
evidence he saw the raised knife gesture, and that is why he approached no
closer. gesture or no gesture, the staff member could have intended to toss the
medical supplies to mr. batchilly who was acting oddly.
there is both an absence of evidence on one of the
essential elements of the charge, and an available alternative inference as to
how the complainant perceived mr. batchilly, in addition to mr. batchilly’s
evidence that he had no intention to intimidate or injure but rather to protect
himself and be left alone to tend to his injuries.
i therefore need not review the defence’s
alternative self-defence submission.
failing to comply
mr. batchilly was on a release order to “not
possess any weapon(s) as defined by the
criminal code
(for example …anything
designed to be used or intended for use to cause death or injury or to threaten
or intimidate any person., contrary to
section 145
,
subsection (5)
, clause (a)
of the
criminal code
of canada”.
mr. khan provided direct evidence that he saw mr.
batchilly go from using a knife to shave off shards of glass from his feet, to
raising the knife to chest height and yelling at a staff member to “get away”.
mr. batchilly himself testified that he wanted
to “scare” the staff member to “stay away” when he raised the knife they saw
the knife.
i find, mr. batchilly was in possession of a
knife, and he used it to intimidate a person.
vi.
conclusion
the crown’s burden is high. he must prove that
mr. batchilly assaulted a person with a knife beyond a reasonable doubt. for
the reasons above, he did not. i find mr. batchilly not guilty of an assault
with a weapon.
on the count of failing to comply with a release
order, that of being in possession of a weapon, a knife, i find the crown has
met its burden and am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. batchilly is
guilty of that count.
released:  march
17, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria