ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. robbins
, 2025 oncj 456
date:
2025 01 22
court
file no.:  owen sound 20-1645
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
adam robbins
before
justice v.l. brown
heard
on january 15, 16, 17, february 29, october 4,  submissions november 8, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 22, 2025
michelle mckay................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
rumsha siddiqui..........................................
counsel for the defendant adam robbins
brown j.:
the defendant is charged with assault (s. 266) as against
jennifer bernstein (“the complainant”).
the facts:
on the night of november 28
th
, 2020 the parties met at
a local bar, smuggler’s, along with their friends. the complainant was with her
friend, mr. hind.  the defendant was out with his friends, gabriel sugarman,
cole (colton) hendricks, jordan king, dan king, and clayton
lucier.  the two groups had never met before that evening.
the two groups proceeded back to the
complainant’s home together, at her invitation.  as supported by video
evidence, the group was having a good time for 30-60 minutes, when the tone of
the evening took an abrupt turn.
a verbal conflict ensued between the parties,
who ended up outside on the front lawn. it is not disputed that the defendant
assaulted the complainant by punching her in the face [“
the punch
”]; she
fell to the ground and was unresponsive for a moment.
it is alleged that the assault was more
extensive, including dragging the complainant from her home by the hair, over
her front steps, across the lawn and over, then under, a metal dividing rail
between her property and the next, punching the complainant 6 times in the
head, kneeling on her neck so she could not breath, and hitting her with a
pumpkin (jack-o-lantern), 1 - 3 times.
the defendant claims he acted in self defence,
and alleges that the complainant was the aggressor.  she threw an object at him
in the home, she knocked him over a coffee table and he fell.  while outside,
the complainant had hold of his clothing, and he warned her before punching
her.  there was only one punch, and then the defendant and his friends went to
their vehicles to leave.  the complainant got up and chased after them,
grabbing the door handle of one of the vehicles as it was moving.
later that morning, around 4am, the defendant
and his friends re-attended down the street from the complainant’s home for a
confrontation with the complainant’s friend, mr. hind, as arranged with mr.
hind in advance.  the complainant was also present, and held a knife.  upon
seeing this, the males scattered.
the crown proceeded summarily and called the
complainant, jason warwick, amanda mckeevor, dr. sunil mehta, cliff hind, and
police constable nathan curry as its witnesses.
the defence called the defendant, daniel king
and clayton lucier to testify.  the defendant admitted date, jurisdiction and
identity, along with text messages between the parties on november 29th and
november 30th, 2020, as well as photographs of the complainant’s injuries.
within the text messages is an admission by the defendant that he assaulted the
complainant; “u got knocked the fuck out by a 17 year old…i only threw one
punch and you were out cold”. he conceded this in his evidence.
the defence admits the assault insofar as the
defendant punched the complainant in the face with his fist.  the issue is
whether he did so in self defence.
crown position:
the crown submits that there is no reliable
evidence upon which to assess self defence.  the crown conceded that the
complainant’s own evidence was exaggerated and difficult to accept.  however,
the most compelling and independent evidence comes from the complainant’s
neighbours, jason warwick and amanda mckeevor, who observed more than a simple
punch; they also observed the defendant to hit the complainant with a pumpkin,
after she was already on the ground and “knocked out”.
aside from the defendant, his witnesses were not
in a position to observe whether he hit the complainant with a pumpkin or not.
the crown submits that the medical evidence is not conclusive of the
extent of the assault, except to show more than a single punch, supporting the
complainant’s account.
the crown submits that while standing outside the home, the
complainant had her hands at her sides and was not motioning to threaten the
defendant.  no force was actually being used against the defendant.
further,  he had means of escape.  as a result, the punch was not reasonable.
the
crown submits that the defendant’s evidence was internally and externally
inconsistent and that i cannot rely on it.  in particular that this account of
being knocked to the ground and grabbed by the complainant was not corroborated
by his friends.
further,
the defendant was evasive and tailored regarding the pumpkin, in an effort to
cast himself in a good light, and that his later text exchange with the
complainant revealed more of his true nature.  moreover, his report to pc curry
shows an intent to mislead about the altercation, specifically.
defence position:
the defence submits that the complainant
initiated an attack on the defendant.
the evidence of jason warwick and amanda
mckeevor is unreliable given their vantage point, only observing a portion of
the altercation, and other inconsistencies on the extent of the assault.
similarly, the evidence of the complainant is
unreliable; she was intoxicated that night, evasive in her responses in cross
examination, and her account simply implausible, and inconsistent with the
other evidence.
the defence submits that the defendant’s account
of the evening is reliable in its details, candour, and consistency.  his other
supporting witnesses provided fair testimony.
it was submitted that the defendant was
reasonable in his belief that the complainant was using force against him, or
was threatening to use force, by throwing and item at him in the house and
physically pursuing him. he used a proportionate and reasonable amount of force
by punching her once to protect himself from the ongoing and imminent threat.
he had attempted to flee the confrontation by leaving the house, and then
warning her, but the complainant persisted.  physically, the defendant was out
matched by the complainant by 40lbs.
the defence submits there is reasonable doubt,
and that a dismissal should follow.
the crown’s evidence:
the complainant was 39 years of age at the time
of the assault, weighing 168lbs.  she is a trained personal support worker, but
at the time she was a stay at home mother to her toddler son, vander.  she has
two adult daughters, namely jaida and maya.  shortly before the assault, the
complainant tragically lost her son, damien; she was grieving the loss of her
son.
clifford hind is 44 years of age and works as a machinist
and project manager for magna international.  he has known the complainant
since he was 14 years of age, having attended high school together.  he has not
seen the complainant since shortly after this incident, so over 3 years ago,
but they remain in contact.
amanda mckeevor and jason warwick were in a
relationship at the time, and were cohabiting 2 houses away from the defendant,
to the left of her home if viewed from the street.  ms. mckeevor had known the
complainant her whole life and they attended high school together.  mr. warwick
similarly knew the complainant from high school.  ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick
were not friends with the complainant and did not speak with each other, but
they were civil.  this remains the case.
on the evening in question, mr. hind was
visiting the complainant for the weekend, to support her after the loss of her
son. during the afternoon of november 28th, 2020, he and the complainant were
hanging out and consuming light alcoholic beverages throughout the day.
the complainant’s mood was unstable, with signs
of upset.  the complainant and mr. hind, had gone out that evening to get her
out of the house.  they went to jason’s pub, and then smuggler’s.  while at
smuggler’s, the complainant met 3 males, one of whom (colton) had gone to
school with her son and had attended the visitation. she had not known him
before that evening.
the complainant invited colton and the others
back to her home to sign a memorial book for her son, and to reminisce about
him.  they stayed until last call, which due to the pandemic was 11pm.
thereafter, the complainant and mr. hind took a taxi to her home, with the 3
males following in a separate taxi.  she had exchanged numbers with one of the
males and texted her address.
the complainant and mr. hind arrived home around
1110-1115pm.  the 3 males arrived and she let them in.  things were fine, with
the group talking by the dining table. about 10-15 minutes after the males
arrived, 2 more males showed up.  the complainant was not aware anyone else was
coming.  the new arrivals said their buddies were there, and the males she had
met at smuggler’s told her to let them in, and she did.  the new arrivals were the
defendant and another male she identified as the “jewish kid”.  the complainant
had never met them before.
mr. hind’s evidence was that the group had
travelled from smugglers together in a red pontiac driven by one of the males.
the group continued to talk in the
dining/kitchen area.  everyone was having a good time. the video evidence
showed them all gathered in the kitchen;  it was loud and those present were
laughing.  the complainant was loud and jovial, sharing an anecdote. the complainant
could be seen speaking directly to the defendant at times, and he was smiling
and laughing back.
mr. hind broke off with a couple of the males,
including the defendant,  and talked about cars. everyone was enjoying
themselves.  however, then mr. hind left the group to use the washroom, things
took a dramatic and unforeseen turn.
according to the complainant, the defendant
started talking about his expensive watch, jewelry and car and boasted that she
would never be able to afford much.  when he allegedly said he was a cocaine
dealer, the complainant asked him to leave. he appeared to be leaving when he
turned and lunged at her.  colton and another male tried to pull the defendant
back and out the door.
she reports that the defendant grabbed her hair
and dragged her outside, off of her stop which was a 1-1.5 foot drop, across the
yard, flipped her over the metal guardrail between properties (a distance of
about 10 steps from her door), back under the rail onto her yard.  she
described it happening really quickly with no opportunity for her to fight
back.
during all of this, he was calling her a
“fucking stupid bitch” and a “cunt”.  she was screaming.
colton tried to get the defendant off of the
complainant.  the defendant then came back on top of her and kneeled on the
right side of her throat.  he moved further down in her larynx area, and she
could not breath.
he delivered 6 punches to her head – her jaw,
temple, and ear.  she recalls her neighbour screaming and everything going
black.  when she came to, he hit her with something else.  when she looked up,
she saw her frozen jack o lantern, the defendant’s face, and he smashed it on
her head.  she lost consciousness again.
when she came to, again, she was in a fog.  she
was in shock, pain, and confused.  she believes he left quickly afterwards. mr.
hind came and helped her up.
mr. hind was not present for the verbal
altercation in the home, nor did he observe the physical altercation outside.
from his place in the upstairs bathroom, he heard a bit of a commotion, and it
sounded to him like a herd of elephants went out the door.  he heard the
complainant raise her voice, but didn’t think anything of it, citing that she
could handle herself.
it wasn’t until he heard the neighbour yelling
that he came downstairs and outside, at which time he observed the visiting
males go to their vehicles and leave.
he observed the complainant on the ground,
moaning in pain, with bruising and tears.  he saw scattered pieces of pumpkin.
he had to help the complainant up from the ground. with his help holding her
up, she was able to get back into the house.
amanda mckeevor and jason warwick reported
hearing a ruckus around midnight. amanda heard the complainant screaming in
distress.  she observed 4-6 males in a  semi circle around the complainant.
the complainant was screaming, and a male was being aggressive in his tone with
her.  the male was being arrogant and going on about his watch, his gucci belt,
and his vehicle.  he was telling the complainant to, “shut the fuck up bitch”,
and  “you don’t know who i am, “i’ve got more money than you have fucking
things in your house”. the complainant was telling them to leave.
amanda recognized the defendant as one of the
males.  she was familiar with him, and knew who his father was. she observed
him punch the complainant in the ear with what she referred to as a full round
house.  she could hear the impact. the complainant fell hard and appeared
unconscious, making no sound or movement.
prior to the punch, amanda observed the
complainant to be swaying back and forth with her arms at her sides; she was
not moving aggressively towards the male.
amanda yelled out at the males, who called her a
“rat goof”. they grabbed a wooden welcome sign and pumpkin from the
complainant’s stoop and the defendant threw the pumpkin at the complainant.
amanda reported that the complainant got up
slowly and the males started to scatter.  the defendant got into a bmw.  others
got into a red standard vehicle, with the complainant initially holding onto it
and running along side it.
jason warwick heard the ruckus and recognized
the complainant’s voice, yelling that she did not care about his rings and
gucci belt.  jason wasn’t aware that it was the complainant who was punched
until she got up and he could see her hair.  he saw a male punch her with a big
hook to the face, which “laid her out”; she was not moving or making any sound.
he described it as a “mike tyson” punch.
he described them smashing a pumpkin off of her
and hitting her with a welcome sign. he hit her with the pumpkin 3 times.  then
he got the welcome sign and hit her with “a couple of butt ends, then a big
swing with the sign”. he recalls someone stating “i’m going to jail over this”
at the time. they were laughing.
the assault lasted 3-4 minutes according to mr.
warwick.
the complainant did not call police at the time,
nor did she seek medical assistance. she managed to get to sleep at around
230am, but woke up, angry.
the defendant initiated contact with her
afterwards, contacting her and mr. hind.  text messages starting at 328am were
entered as an exhibit.  the defendant admitted to knocking her out.  he was
taunting in his messages and stated “enjoy drinking your food for the next
month or three”. in the messages he admits only to one punch and that she was
out cold.  he stated he was fighting back when she came running at him; she
assaulted him and he was defending himself.
the complainant denies running at him, or anyone
else.
pc curry reports that at 455am on november 29,
2020 he was advised by dispatch that the complainant called in wishing to speak
with him.  they had seen each other briefly the night before when the
complainant and cliff were walking from jason’s bar to smuggler’s as pc curry
was doing bar checks in the area. pc curry did not recall the complainant’s
level of sobriety during the encounter.
pc curry called the complainant and she advised
him of the alleged assault.  he made arrangements for the complainant to come
to the station at 730pm that evening (he was working the night shift from 7pm –
7am).  he noted during the phone call that she sounded intoxicated.  he had
prior experience with her while both sober and intoxicated which informed his
impression. she was slurring her words and admitted to drinking. however, he
agreed that he did not have experience with her after being unconscious or
being struck in the head. he does not know her to be a violent person.
pc curry offered ems services to the complainant
during their phone call.  she declined.
the next day ms. mckeevor advises she spoke with
the complainant when the complainant attended her house.  she observed bruising
on the complainant’s right neck under the jaw line, ears and jaw. the
complainant denies attending ms. mckeevor’s home.
the complainant attended the hospital the next
day around 5pm. her injuries included bruising to her jaw, which she later had
to have drained of the blood that was pooling there, her upper right thigh
where she made contact with the guardrail, her ear, her left foot and ankle,
right knee, and swelling and bruising to the left knee.
dr. sunil mehta is the emergency room physician
at brightshores health services who saw the complainant.  he noted contusions
on the complainant’s buttocks, abrasions, and pain in the abdominal area.  most
notably, a large contusion on the jawline of the left side of the complainant’s
face.  her neck was swollen with tenderness, and pain swallowing, which is
consistent with a strangulation injury, but not conclusive; the swelling in
injury related and could have been caused by a fall.  dr. metha was unable to
provide an opinion on the source of the swelling.
dr. mehta examined the complainant to look for
signs on blunt force trauma from a pumpkin strike, expecting to find swelling,
bruising, and possibly skin disruption.  in this case, he found the
complainant’s scalp was normal.
the complainant met with pc curry as scheduled
on november 29th, following her hospital attendance. during his investigation,
pc curry was able to confirm that the phone number that was texting with the
complainant that morning belonged to adam robbins.  as well, he spoke with
jaida mcmillan burrows, the complainant’s daughter, who was able to identify
the defendant from the photo that was taken that night at the complainant’s
home before the alleged assault.
the complainant advised pc curry that a male
punched her in the face/head 6 times and at one point choked her.  she advised
that at one point he knelt on her neck.
after speaking further with amanda mckeevor and
jason warwick, pc curry formed the suspicion that the defendant was the
perpetrator.  he contacted the defendant at 0023 hours on november 30th.  the
defendant admitted to knocking out the complainant.  he was read a primary
caution.  the defendant explained that he knocked her out.  he was cooperative
and turned himself in. at 0124 hours the defendant was arrested and released.
pc curry also spoke with jordan king, one of the
others present, who told him that the complainant came at the defendant with a
knife.
the alleged assault has left an impact on the
complainant.  her voice has not returned to normal, and she can no longer sing
as she did.  as well, she has memory problems.
the defence evidence:
the defendant is 22 years of age. he recently
completed a post secondary program of education and is working in the trades in
various locations. at the time of alleged offence, the defendant was 18 years
of age and approximately 120lbs.
earlier in the evening of november 28, 2020, the
defendant, cole (colton) hendricks, jordan king, dan king, and clayton lucier
were together at gabriel sugarman’s house.  some of the group wanted to go to a
bar.  they left sometime after dinner, departing in a red pontiac sunfire and a
4 door grey hatchback.
the defendant and jordan king were not of age,
and did not go into the bar.  cole encountered the complainant and mr. hind
outside of the bar and started talking to them.  the group, including the
complainant and mr. hind, then departed for the complainant’s home.  mr. hind
travelled in the trunk of cole’s pontiac sunfire (although there was not need),
with the complainant in the passenger seat, and the defendant in the back.
clayton, daniel and gabriel left at the same time and followed them to the
complainant’s home.  the pontiac sunfire parted in the driveway, with the
second car on the side of the road in front of the house.
while at the complainant’s home, the defendant
likely had 1-2 beers.  he had not been drinking earlier. the defendant spent
some time discussing cars with mr. hind in the living room. they moved to the
area of the doorway to the kitchen.
some 30-60 minutes after the parties’ arrival at
the home, the complainant started making comments about his designer belt.  she
was aggravated, verbally loud and yelling.  he defended himself verbally.  the
complainant threw a flower pot at him, then made her way across the kitchen to
him, screaming.
the defendant testified that the complainant
became physical and pushed him into the living room.  he walked backwards,
trying to avoid her. he described being pushed into a table, and tripping over
the baby gate at the front door.  mr. king was at the door.  the defendant
kicked the pumpkin which was on the step outside, breaking it. he does not
recall any other items on the doorstep. he was distraught, and waited in the
front yard by the vehicles for the others.
the complainant exited the house, running
directly at him, yelling.  he described her holding him by the collar and
stomach area of his sweater.  the complainant was facing the street and the
defendant facing the house. he warned her, stepped back and swung at her.  he
did not know her intentions at the time. the defendant assumes he “knocked out”
the complainant, she certainly fell to the ground, but she was not down for
very long and she got up and ran at him with a piece of pumpkin.
the males then got into the vehicles.  the
defendant claims the complainant picked up a piece of pumpkin and ran at him a
second time with it, and he swatted it out of her hand.
he described events escalating quickly, events
taking place over the course of only a few minutes.  his goal was to get out.
the defendant claims he swung at the complainant
for his safety and in self defence.  after the altercation in the house, he had
no idea of her intentions, but felt it necessary to defend himself.
he denies hitting the complainant with any
objects, holding a “welcome sign”, kneeling on her neck on the ground or
dragging her over the front lawn.
daniel king is 23 years of age.  he is friends
with the defendant, though they currently text only on occasion.
mr. king testified that the parties were all
socializing and having a nice time at the complainant’s house.  the complainant
and defendant got into a verbal altercation about what the defendant was
wearing.  the complainant was quite upset; she was obnoxious, upset, mad, and
retaliated.  the defendant was yelling at the complainant.  the complainant was
screaming at him and pursuing him in his personal space.  the defendant told
the complainant to “back off”. mr. king does not recall the complainant
throwing any objects at the defendant or otherwise laying hands on him within
the house.
mr. king suggested they leave (i.e. the males
leave), and he and the defendant were on the way out.  once outside, he
observed the defendant kick a pumpkin.  the complainant exited right after them
and pursued the defendant, “chirping” and taunting him.  he continued to tell
her to back off, and mr. king observed her to be trying to attack him, and be
physical.  mr. king observed the defendant strike the complainant once with a
closed hand punch, and she hit the ground. he did not see the defendant strike
her again.  he did not observe the defendant strike the complainant with any
objects (i.e. the pumpkin or a sign). the neighbours were yelling and the males
went to the vehicles. mr. king was not watching the defendant while running to
the car, and his back was to the complainant.
mr. king was surprised and not surprised at the
punch; it was “out of the blue” and the defendant is not violent, but she was
pursuing him.
mr. king observed the complainant to try and get
in the vehicle he was riding in, and he had to hold the door shut.
mr. lucier is 23 year of age.  he has known the
defendant for 5 years and considers them friends. they are in contact, but not
regularly.
mr. lucier was with the defendant on the evening
of november 28, 2020. mr. lucier was not drinking before arriving at the
complainant’s home that evening.
while seated at the kitchen table across from
the complainant, he observed the defendant comment on his income from roofing,
and that it seemed to upset the complainant, and “set her off”.  he observed
the complainant throw a glass at the defendant, missing him.  she lunged at the
defendant around the kitchen table. mr. lucier was shocked and nervous for his
friend.
the defendant’s response was to back away,
panicking.  the complainant chased him out of the kitchen, down the hallways,
and out the front door onto the front lawn.  mr. lucier, along with others,
followed behind.
once outside, mr. lucier observed the defendant
backing away from the complainant, the complainant lunged at him several times,
and the defendant punch the complainant once while repeating “get away from
me”. the complainant appeared unconscious on the ground.  the neighbours
started shouting and the males got in their vehicles and left.
as they were leaving, the complainant was up and
chasing the vehicle he was in, trying to open the door.
mr. lucier does not recall anything about a
pumpkin, or where he was situated on the lawn. events transpired quickly, too
fast to intervene; it was hectic. the defendant was visibly upset afterwards.
legal framework:
the
offence of
assault
is defined by the
criminal
code
as:
265
(1)
a person commits an assault when
(a)
without
the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other
person, directly or indirectly;
(b)
he
attempts or threatens, by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another
person, if he has, or causes that other person to believe on reasonable grounds
that he has, present ability to effect his purpose; or
(c)
while
openly wearing or carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or
impedes another person or begs.
(2)
this
section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault, sexual
assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm and
aggravated sexual assault.
the
available defences are set out in
ss. 27
,
34
and
35
of the
criminal code
,
which
state:
27
every one is justified in using as
much force as is reasonably necessary
(a)
to prevent the
commission of an offence
(i)
for which, if it
were committed, the person who committed it might be arrested without warrant,
and
(ii)
that would be
likely to cause immediate and serious injury to the person or property of
anyone; or
(b)
to prevent anything being done
that, on reasonable grounds, he believes would, if it were done, be an offence
mentioned in paragraph (a).
34
(1)
a person is not guilty of an offence if
(a)
they believe on reasonable
grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a
threat of force is being made against them or another person;
(b)
the act that constitutes the
offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or
the other person from that use or threat of force; and
(c)
the act committed is
reasonable in the circumstances.
(2)
in determining whether the act
committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the
relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including,
but not limited to, the following factors:
(a)
the nature of the force or
threat;
(b)
the extent to which the use of
force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to
the potential use of force;
(c)
the person’s role in the
incident;
(d)
whether any party to the
incident used or threatened to use a weapon;
(e)
the size, age, gender and
physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
(f)
the nature, duration and
history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any
prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;
(f.1)
any history of interaction or
communication between the parties to the incident;
(g)
the nature and proportionality
of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and
(h)
whether the act committed was
in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful
this
list is not exhaustive, but provides for a contextual analysis.
in
discussing the amended s. 34, the supreme court in
r
. v.
khill,
2021
scc 37
, summarizes the basic elements of all cases of self defence as:
1.
the accused must reasonably believe that
force or a threat of force is being used against them or someone else.
the
accused's response is not limited to a defensive use of force. it can apply to
other classes of offences, including acts that tread upon the rights of
innocent third parties, such as theft, breaking and entering or dangerous
driving. replacing "assault" with "force" also clarifies
that imminence is not a strict requirement
;
2.
the subjective purpose for responding to
the threat must be to protect oneself or others; and
3.
the accused's act must be reasonable in
the circumstances.
the nature and proportionality of the accused's
response to the use or threat of force is but one factor that informs the
overall reasonableness of the accused's actions in the circumstances.
th
e first two requirements address the belief
and the subjective purpose of the accused. a belief that force is being against
her must be a reasonable one, and the subjective purpose of the use of violence
in response must be for protection (see
r
. v.
khill
,
2021
scc 37
, at paras.
53 and 59
).
in
this case, it is alleged that the complainant actually had hands on the
defendant’s person via his clothing, and otherwise was physically pursuing the
defendant, including lunging at him repeatedly.  the requirement is not that
actual force was going to be used against a defendant; the defence can still be
made out when a person is mistaken in their belief (see:
r
. v.
khill
,
at para
66
;
r
. v.
cunha
,
2016 onca 491
; and,
r
. v.
richter
,
2014 bcca 244
.  the relevant consideration is the whether the defendant truly
held the belief, and whether it was objectively reasonable in the
circumstances.
indeed,
the court of appeal also recognized that in situations of peril, there is not
the time for full reflection and errors will be made (
r
. v.
mohammed
,
2014 onca 442
referencing
r.
v.
hebert
,
1996 canlii 202 (scc)
, 1996 2 s.c.r. 272).
the
third requirement is concerned with the reasonableness, or proportionality,  of
the accused's actions. it requires determining if the act was reasonable
through the perspective of a reasonable person with some of the defendant’s
qualities and experiences (
r
. v.
khill
, at para.
67
).
to raise the defence of self-defence, the court
must first determine if there is an air of reality to it.  the accused need
only point to evidence giving an air of reality to each element of the defence
(
r. v. wolf
,
2019 skca 103
, at para.
132
).
once the accused has done so, the crown bears the
burden of proving that the defence of self-defence does not apply.
the onus is always on the crown to establish all elements of the
offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt, or one
based upon sympathy or prejudice, but is a doubt based on reason and common
sense that is logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence (see
r
.
v.
lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
, 3 scr 320 at para.
39
). where the trier of fact is
unable to resolve the conflicting
credible
evidence, there is reasonable
doubt (
r
. v.
challice
,
(1979) 45 c.c.c. (2d) 436
onca).
conversely, even when there is credible
exculpatory evidence with no obvious flaws, the court may still find guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt where the crown’s evidence is strong and compelling (
r. v. m. (o.)
,
2014 onca 503
, 313 c.c.c. (3d) 5 (ont. c.a.), at para.
40
).
also,
it is not enough for me to conclude that the defendant is probably guilty of an
offence, and although i do not have to be absolutely certain of his guilt, the
standard of reasonable doubt “falls much closer to absolute certainty than to
proof on a balance of probabilities” (
r
. v.
starr
,
2000 scc 40
at
para.
242
).
in cases of self-defence, in order for the crown to
meet this burden, this means the crown must disprove, beyond a reasonable
doubt, at least one of the three constituent elements of the defence
under
s.
34(1) (
r. v. mcphee
,
2018 onca 1016
, at para.
15
;
see also
r. v. randhawa
,
2019 bcca 15
at para.
34
)
.
the issues:
there is no dispute that the defendant punched the
complainant with sufficient force to “knock her out”.  therefore, on the facts
of this case, the questions for determination are therefore:
1.
did the defendant subjectively believe that force, or threat of force,
was being used against him;
2.
whether in punching the complaint, the defendant he was defending
himself from use of force against him; and
3.
if so, was punching her out reasonable in the circumstances.
if the answer to any of the above questions is “no”,
then the defence of self defence fails.
in making this
determination i must consider reasonable doubt through a modified
r. v. w.(d.)
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
1 scr 742
,
framework (
r. v. reid
(2003),
2003 canlii 14779 (on ca)
,
65 or (3d) 723
at pp.
740-4)
:
a. if i accept the defendant’s
evidence and based on it, i believe or have a reasonable doubt that he was
acting in lawful self-defence, i must find the defendant not guilty.
b. even if i do not accept the defendant’s
evidence, if, after considering it alone or in conjunction with the other
evidence, i believe or have a reasonable doubt that he was acting in
lawful self-defence, i must find the defendant not guilty.
credibility assessment:
in assessing credibility it is important not to hold either party to
the standard of perfection, and not every lapse in memory or inconsistency will
be equally important. indeed, inconsistencies and lapses are to be expected in
most cases as the passage of time inevitably affects memory, if nothing else.
as stated in
r.
v.
w. (r.),
1992 canlii 56 (scc)
, 2 s.c.r. 122
(s.c.c.), at p. 134 “every witness, irrespective of age, is an individual whose
credibility and evidence should be assessed according to criteria appropriate
to his or her mental development, understanding, and ability to communicate”.
this includes their perception, concept of time, and focus on the event rather
than on peripheral matters.
as both parties recognize, the accounts regarding the events of the
night of november 28th and morning of november 29th, 2020 are largely conflicting.
further, no witness’ evidence is without difficulty.
most witnesses observed only portions of the altercation, from
different vantages and at different points.  some conflict in the evidence is
therefore to be expected.
the issue for this court is firstly determining the relevant facts
based on not just the conflicting evidence, but the credible conflicting
evidence.  the onus is on the crown to establish these facts beyond a
reasonable doubt.
the complainant:
the complainant was evasive, sarcastic, and argumentative in her
evidence.  i understand she suffers from anxiety and ptsd, and that court on
the best of days is stressful. at the time of trial, the complainant was also
undergoing treatment for cancer and was not well during parts of her evidence.
i draw no negative inferences about her credibility from her demeanor during
the trial. however, it does give some insight as to how she responds to
stressful circumstances, or when challenged, such as on the night in question.
these observations are consistent with the description of others who
know her.  she is gently described as “outspoken”, and able to handle herself.
she was described as obnoxious, and her loud nature could be observed in the
video taken that evening, although the environment that night was generally
loud.
i find that the complainant’s ability to recall the events of that
evening, including the assault, were impaired due to the passage of time, her
intoxication, and memory issues. indeed, she reported facts that were clearly
wrong on the strength of more compelling and corroborated evidence.
i do not accept the complainant’s claim that she was not intoxicated
that night. whereas she stated she felt only a little buzzed, she and mr. hind
had been drinking since the afternoon, and he described their level increasing
level of intoxication as 3.5 out of 5 upon leaving smuggler’s, and growing more
intoxicated at the complainant’s home.
it is alleged on credible evidence that mr. hind travelled to the
complainant’s home in the trunk of the pontiac sunfire, which may be some
indication of his (and the complainant’s) level of intoxication.
ms. mckeevor described observing the complainant intoxicated
frequently during that period in time, which may be understandable given she
was grieving.  ms. mckeevor had the experience with the complainant to be able
to determine whether she was intoxicated, and in her observation that evening,
she was.
pc curry also had interactions with the complainant in his
professional capacity while she was under the influence. to his observation
during their phone call at 455am that morning, she was intoxicated, to the
point he asked her to come in the next day instead.
to those who knew her, the complainant was intoxicated.
as well, the complainant’s evidence regarding her memory was self
serving and changeable.  when recounting the assault, she stated she had no memory
issues.  however, when speaking about the extent of the assault and the long
term impact on her, she disclosed that she in fact does have memory issues
since the assault.
as well, the complainant did not recall meeting the defendant at
smuggler’s and believed he arrived at her home after the fact, but according to
the text exhibits he had her number when they were departing smuggler’s, and on
the other credible evidence they all arrived together.
the complainant’s evidence on important aspects of the assault are
unreliable, at times incredible.  she testified that she was punched 6 times,
and that the defendant knelt on her neck, choking her.  she did not get up
except with the assistance of mr. hind, as the males were leaving.
however, the universal evidence of all other witnesses (except mr.
hind), was that she was standing when the defendant punched her, and then she
fell to the ground, rising up to chase after the defendant and the other males.
i also have concerns about her report about being hit in the head
with a pumpkin weighing 12-15 pounds.  there was no corresponding injury as
would be medically expected, either at the time, or afterwards, and she made a
point of documenting the progression of any injuries.
the complainant also exaggerated her evidence in a way to make her
injuries more extreme.  she claimed the emergency room doctor told her she will
never have her full voice back.  in cross examination she changed her evidence
to say her family doctor said it, and that the emergency room doctor said she
may have permanent damage to her larynx and trachea.  dr. mehta, whose
credibility is not impeached, denied this.
the complainant also tried to avoid negative impressions, by
misrepresenting the status of her then criminal proceedings after trying to
avoid the subject entirely.
the complainant’s evidence is largely unreliable; i find i cannot
rely on it regarding the material facts in issue.
clifford
hind:
mr. hind’s evidence was not helpful in determining the material
facts;  he did not witness the verbal altercation in the house or the assault.
his evidence that he assisted the complainant from the ground after the assault
is unreliable; all other witnesses uniformly report the complainant being on
her feet chasing the males in their vehicles.
amanda
mckeevor and jason warwick:
the crown submits that the evidence of these two witnesses is strong
and compelling.  however, their evidence is not without some concern.
amanda mckeevor and jason warwick appeared to do their best in their
evidence.  they were residing two houses to the left of the complainant’s home
(if viewed from the street). they were in the upstairs bedroom facing the
street, and not towards the complainant’s home.  however, they opened the
window to see better.
it was late at night at or after midnight, and it was dark out but
for their porch light and that of their neighbours.  they were unable to make
out detail, but were able to observe silhouettes on the complainant’s lawn,
identifying the complainant by her body shape, hair and her voice.
the complainant was facing towards the street so her right side and
back would have been towards the witnesses.  ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick would
not have been in a position to view both of the complainant’s arms to know they
were both at her side.  as well, the complainant was standing beyond the large
tree in her front yard, which would have obstructed some of ms. mckeevor and
mr. warwick’s view.  as described by ms. mckeevor there were also 4-6 males
standing in a semi circle, which would create further obstacles.
indeed, ms. mckeevor acknowledges there was a lot of commotion and a
lot of moving bodies.
it was not the birds eye view suggested by the crown.  while in a
higher position, it was not a direct or clear view.  it is also unclear to me
how they would have a view of the complainant’s stoop, where the pumpkin was
originally located, unless they were leaning out of the window as the frontage
of their homes are flush.
as well, due to the lighting, they were not able to make out
details, including the complainant’s face, raising the question of how they
could know the defendant had a pumpkin in his hands.
what is most disturbing is ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick’s evidence
regarding the extent of the assault (the pumpkin and the welcome sign).  ms.
mckeevor did not initially report the assault with the pumpkin.  what is more
concerning is that in their  evidence at trial ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick
reported the complainant being assaulted with the welcome sign.
while ms. mckeevor’s explanation was that she did not want to be
involved, that does not explain the fact that the welcome sign was only gifted
to the complainant some  six months after the assault, so sometime in 2021.
they could not have observed an assault with the welcome sign, therefore
calling into question not only the reliability of their evidence, but their
credibility.
in a bizarre bit of evidence, mr. warwick also testified that the
males returned shortly after and went back into the complainant’s house for a
little bit, which is clearly not the case, and by his description he was not
confusing this with the males later return some hours later.  no other
witnesses observed the males return right after the assault, including ms.
mckeevor who was with mr. warwick, and the complainant and/or mr. hind would
certainly have mentioned this in their evidence. again, this raises both
credibility and reliability concerns.
the
defendant:
the defendant’s evidence was consistent and unchanging in cross
examination. i find for the most part his evidence was credible and reliable.
although the defendant appeared to be incorrect about the presence
of mr. hind during the altercation, this is a peripheral matter and it is
understandable that there would be some such errors.  events happened quickly
and chaotically, and not everyone was tracking where the other’s present were.
i do not find that this error affects the defendant’s credibility and that he
was honestly mistaken.
the defendant was reluctant to offer some of the denigrating
comments he made to the complainant, focusing on her behaviour, but ultimately
he admitted to using profanity and was otherwise consistent in saying he was
“defending” against the comments the complainant was making. he provided more
detail in cross examination and agreed that he probably was swearing at her and
told her to fuck off and leave him alone.
the other defence witnesses confirmed he was yelling back at the
complainant, telling her to back off. other, more sanitary, language he used at
trial was that he warned her he would “retaliate” before he swung at her. he
admitted he did not recall exactly what he said, but it was to the effect of
letting him go or he would punch her. the other defence witnesses confirm he
was telling her to back off. dan could not recall specifically what was said
before punching her. clayton also could not recall the words, but it was along
the lines of “get away from me” and that he was backing away, warning her.
however, the others were clear that the complainant was pursuing the
defendant, and while outside she was trying to be physical with the defendant
and lunging at him.
the crown raised as a credibility  issue the defendant discussing
the trial evidence with kelly swan, an acquaintance of ms. mckeevor’s, as a
breach of my order excluding witnesses.  however, it was not anticipated that
ms. swan would be a witness, and the order prohibited witnesses discussing
their evidence with other witnesses.  i draw no inferences from this.
the crown suggested that the final resting place of the pumpkin was
inconsistent with the defendant’s evidence which would have the pumpkin landing
in the driveway, and not the lawn.  however, the defendant’s evidence was that it
scattered in front of him on the lawn, he did not recall where.  further, mr. king
confirmed it broke on the lawn, but at the crown’s suggestion conceded it could
have gone on driveway.  this is not an inconsistency with either the evidence
of the defence witnesses or the photographic evidence.
in his conversation with pc curry the night after the assault, it is
alleged that the defendant reported that he punched the complainant because she
pulled a knife on him.  however, at trial, he did not recall saying that, and agreed
that would not make sense (the complainant did not have a knife at the time of
the assault, but had one later when the males returned).  i cannot find this is
an inconsistency; the report was not taken verbatim regarding the knife, and
there certainly would be a notation that a knife was involved at some point
that morning.  pc curry had no independent recollection of what was recorded in
his notes to be able to provide clarity.
daniel king
and clayton lucier:
mr. king and mr. lucier also appeared to do their best in their
evidence.  both recognized the impact of the passage of time on their memories,
and did not attempt to fill in memory gaps or guess at what happened.
mr. king concedes that his memory was not the best as events were 4
years ago and he was drinking a bit. he was fair when asked about the
complainant’s level of intoxication, admitting that he didn’t know what she was
like normally and that his assessment was based on her being loud and
obnoxious. he was frank about when he was uncertain, and that there may have
been other options other than punching the complainant.
mr. lucier also recognized the impact of time on his memory, but
felt it was not impaired by alcohol that evening.
i find that the evidence of mr. king and mr. lucier is credible and
reliable; the mere fact that it conflicts with the complainant’s evidence is
not reason to dismiss it; indeed, it conflicts with the evidence of the
defendant on certain points.  while obviously friends with the defendant, there
is no evidence to suggest they fabricated their evidence to support him.
at the beginning of the altercation inside the house, mr. lucier was
seated across the table from the complainant, and thereafter followed behind.
mr. king was also present and preceded the defendant out of the house.  given
their respective locations in relation to the altercation, as well as being
present during both the verbal and physical conflict, they were in a good
position to observe up close what happened.
discussion and analysis:
the crown submits that the judge does not have an easy job assessing
the conflicting evidence.  indeed, several witnesses only witnessed parts of
the altercation, from different vantages, and no two accounts are the same.
however, the court is not required to know exactly what happened or to
reconcile all inconsistencies.  what is required is that the crown establish
the material facts beyond a reasonable doubt on reliable evidence.
i find the following material facts have been established on the
credible and reliable evidence, beyond a reasonable doubt:
(1)
the parties were engaged in a verbal exchange in the kitchen.  as
attested to by mr. lucier who was also seated at the table across from the
complainant, something set her off.
(2)
the complainant threw an object at the defendant.  mr. lucier confirmed
this in his evidence, and he was in a good position to observe this.  mr. king
did not see this, but that could have been due to his vantage point.
(3)
the complainant pursued the defendant while in the home;
(4)
i find that the complainant continued to pursue the defendant outside of
her home;  she left her home under her own power that evening.  i accept the
evidence of the defence, and the crown third party witnesses that the
complainant was on her front lawn arguing with the defendant.  she was
intoxicated, but she was standing in front of the defendant, facing the street.
contrary to her statement that if she had the ability to do so she would have
gone into the house, the complainant was committed to the conflict with the
defendant and was voluntarily engaged with him in that moment.
(5)
i find that the defendant struck the complainant with his right fist to
her left jaw area with sufficient force to knock her to the ground and she was
momentarily unresponsive.
beyond that, and except as set out herein,  it would be unsafe for
me to make further material findings of fact given the conflicting
credible
evidence.
on the material issue of the extent of the assault, which goes to
whether there is an air of reality to the claim of self defence, alternatively
the proportionality of the response, i cannot resolve the evidence.  i have
reasonable doubt about whether the defendant struck the complainant a second
time or assaulted her in some other manner beyond the punch.
i have grappled with this issue especially in light of the
circumstantial medical/physical evidence from which an inference may be drawn
that the assault possibly, if not probably, exceeded a single punch.  in
addition to the obvious contusion to the complainant’s left jaw from the punch,
the medical records note contusions on both knees, right upper thought, right
lower leg, leg lower leg and ankle, buttocks, rear thighs, right arm and left
wrist. there were some abrasions to the left side of her face. the complainant
also reported pain and bruising to her upper chest and neck area.
the location of the injuries, both front and back strain explanation
by a single fall to the ground, but they also do not reflect several key
aspects of the assault alleged by the complainant, ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick,
including multiple hard punches to the head or other parts of her body, and
being struck in the head or other parts of her body 1-3 times with a blunt
object such as a pumpkin or welcome sign.
as conceded by dr. mehta, a hard fall could also explain some of the
injuries, in particular he was asked about the observations of the
complainant’s neck.  the evidence is uniformly that the complainant fell hard,
which is another exculpatory inference that can be drawn from the
medical/physical evidence.  such plausible exculpatory inferences must result
in reasonable doubt (
r
. v.
villaroman,
2016 scc 33
).
it is also possible that the complainant fell more than once; mr.
hind’s evidence about assisting the complainant from the ground only makes
sense if she fell again after chasing the cars. however, neither the
complainant, nor ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick, indicated this in their evidence
and it would be speculation.
while it is probable that more than a punch was rendered, that is insufficient
to meet the high burden required for a finding to be made.
i also have significant doubt about whether the defendant struck the
complainant with a pumpkin or welcome sign:
(1)
the complainant testified that she received the welcome sign some six
months after the assault.  she was not questioned on whether she owned a
different sign on the date of the assault, and she did not offer any evidence herself
of other property damage or use of a sign;
(2)
the only witnesses to testify about the use of the welcome sign were ms.
mckeevor and mr. warwick.  ms. mckeevor did not advise police of this in her
statement, which would be consistent with the evidence that the welcome sign
was only received after the assault;
(3)
similarly, this calls into question what they observed, or testified,
about the defendant hitting the complainant with a pumpkin.  from their vantage
point, it is difficult to understand how they could have observed anyone take
the pumpkin from the door steps, or what objects were being held in the darkness;
(4)
also, according to the complainant, mr. hind’s car was in her driveway,
with the pontiac sunfire behind it, which would have further obstructed with
the view of the stoop, along with the tree (the google maps photo shoes that
the parking spot closest to the home is right by the door and steps).
(5)
the physical/medical evidence also does not support the complainant and crown
witnesses’ evidence that she was struck in the head with a pumpkin.  there was
no injury, swelling, bruising or other sign of trauma to her scalp as one would
expect after being hit hard with an object of that weight.
(6)
the pumpkin shards are also plausibly explained by the defendant’s
evidence that he kicked the pumpkin upon exiting the home. mr. king was able to
observe the kick as he was already at the door when the defendant exited.  mr.
lucier was not in a position to see the pumpkin kick as he exited after the
defendant; these are not inconsistencies.
while it is available to the court to reject the defence
evidence on the strength of credible contradictory inculpatory evidence, as set
out above, i have serious concerns about ms. mckeevor and mr. warwick’s ability
to observe an assault with the objects as they have reported, or their
credibility in doing so.  while what they reported may be true, their evidence
is not so strong given these concerns to reject the otherwise credible
exculpatory evidence of the defence.  therefore, the crown has not established
an assault with the pumpkin or welcome sign beyond a reasonable doubt.
i now turn to my
analysis of the self defence claim as it relates to the punch.
is there an air of reality to the claim of self defence?
i find there is
an air of reality to the claim of self defence.  as set out above, there is
evidence before the court, the source of which i find to be credible and
reliable, which would support the requirements of self defence. in particular
the evidence that the complainant continued to pursue the defendant and was
attempting to engage him physically, as he retreated.  he may not have warned
her that he would punch her specifically, but there is evidence that he did
implicitly warn her by telling her to get away from him.
the onus is
therefore on the crown to disprove each of the elements of self defence beyond
a reasonable doubt.
did the defendant reasonably believe force, or threat of
force, was being used against him?
this element of self defence has at ti
mes been
called “the catalyst”.
this
element is assessed on a modified objective standard: the defendant’s beliefs
are considered from the "perspective of an ordinary person who shares the
attributes, experiences and circumstances of the accused where those
characteristics and experiences were relevant to the accused's belief or
actions" (
r
. v.
khill
,
supra
, at para.
54
).
i find that i have reasonable doubt
regarding this element.  that is, i have doubt that the defendant did not
reasonably believe the complainant was going to be physical with him for the
following reasons:
•
there was credible evidence that the complainant was the
aggressor in initiating the confrontation. she threw an object at the
defendant, and thereafter physically pursued the defendant.
•
the complainant did not stop when the defendant left her home;
she continued to pursue him onto the lawn.  even on the observations of ms.
mckeevor and mr. warwick, the complainant was outside, standing, and until the
punch was thrown by the defendant, there was no physical interaction between
them that would have prevented her from going back in the home.  this
contradicts her testimony that she never approached him and would have stayed
in the home.
•
the complainant was being verbally aggressive; both parties were.
•
the other defence witnesses we also concerned for the defendant,
and noted that the complainant was trying to be physical with him.  mr. king
could not recall if there was actual touching, but he had the clear impression
the complainant was trying to be physical, possibly trying to grab him or put
her fingers in his face.  mr. lucier testified that the complainant was
physically chasing the defendant and lunging at him multiple times while on the
front lawn.
even
accepting that the complainant may not have had
hold of his hoodie, given the other defence witnesses’ concerns about the
complainant’s behaviour towards him, i find that the defendant had reasonable
grounds to believe that the complainant intended physical force against him.
did the defendant act for a
defensive purpose?
otherwise known as the motive, the
defendant’s actions in punching the complainant must have been done for his
protection from harm, or threat of harm.  this is a purely subjective inquiry
into mind of the defendant at the time.
on this question, i have reasonable
doubt.  although the defendant did not know the complainant’s intentions, the
defendant perceived that she was acting physically towards him and cautioned
her several times, even as he punched her. he felt the need to defend himself
after the complainant had already acted violently in throwing an object at him.
it was reasonable to expect further violence from the complainant, especially
given her intoxicated state. even mr. lucier was shocked at what was
transpiring.
was it reasonable for the
defendant to punch the complainant in the circumstances?
in considering this element, the supreme court
of canada stated that "the focus must remain on
what a
reasonable person would have done in comparable circumstances
and
not what a particular accused thought at the time" (
r
. v.
khill
,
supra
, at para.
65
). so, the question is
whether it was reasonable for an 18 year old 120lb teenager to punch a 168 lb, mid-thirties,
outspoken, angry, and intoxicated woman, who he perceived was coming at him,
lunging at him, hard once to the head?  i find i have reasonable doubt that he
was not.
although s. 34(2) provides a list of non-exhaustive
considerations it is not a checklist, and not all considerations will bear
equal importance or weight.  the whole of the circumstances must be balanced.
nature
of the force or threat:
on the credible evidence before the court, the complainant
was threatening a physical confrontation with the defendant.  she threw an
object at him, and even upon him leaving her home she continued to pursue him
outside, and was seen lunging at him.  even though the defendant did not know
her intentions, it was his perception that she was trying to be physical with
him, and her behaviour caused the defendant to continue backing away.
there is conflicting evidence about whether the complainant
had actual hold of the defendant, but for this element of self defence to be
successful, the threat of force is sufficient, and on the facts before the
court this is made out.
imminency
of the threat and other means of response:
the crown suggested that the defendant  could have fled the scene.
while there is no duty to retreat, this is a relevant consideration (see
r
.
v.
willemsen
,
2022 onca 722
at para
20
).
there may be several options available in any given moment,
retreat being among them, and they may all be reasonable.  the ontario court of
appeal also recognizes that, “
people using
defensive force in stressful and dangerous situations are not expected to weigh
their responses to a nicety” (
see:
r
. v.
cunha
,
2016 onca 491
,
at para.
7
; and,
r. v. r.s.,
2019 onca 832
(ont.
c.a.), at para.
36
.
as well, people are not held to a standard of making the best
decision possible when facing perceived imminent harm, and they may not know
how much force to use to defend themselves (see
r
. v.
bélanger
,
2003 canlii 47856
(q.c.c.a.) at para.
15
).
in this case, the defendant was not familiar with the home and he
had no independent means to leave as he had travelled with his friends who had
the car keys.  it was late, dark, and he had no where to go.   his friends were
of no assistance, and simply watched.
he did leave the house, but the complainant followed.  he was
before her and the threat was imminent. he had not where to go, and was waiting
for his friends so he could leave. event transpired quickly without time to
make a more calculated plan, with the only other possible plan being to walk in
an unfamiliar neighbourhood in the dark.  therefore,
i
have reasonable doubt that there was a better alternative.
role in the incident
:
the majority of
the supreme court of canada adopted a broad interpretation of "role in the
incident", stating at para. 84 that:
"... the phrase "role
in the incident" includes acts and omissions, decisions taken and rejected
and alternative courses of action which may not have been considered. it
captures the full range of human conduct: from the good samaritan and the
innocent victim of an unprovoked assault, to the initial and persistent
aggressor, and everything in between (see, e.g
.
r. v.
lessard
,
2018 qccm
249
).
thus "role in the incident"
encompasses not only provocative or unlawful conduct, but also hotheadedness,
the reckless escalation of risk, and a failure to reasonably reassess the
situation as it unfolds.
as the crown submits, this does not
mean that the reasonableness assessment is "unbounded" or overly
subjective. the inquiry is broad, not vague."
the credible and
reliable evidence before the court is that the both the complainant and the
defendant were using profanities and engaging verbally with each other.  however,
on the established facts, the defendant had not been physically violent or
threatening towards the complainant until the punch.
whether either party used or threatened to use a weapon:
th
e defendant did not threaten to use a weapon in
that moment, but the complainant had only moments early thrown an object at the
defendant, and the situation was fluid and unfolding rapidly.
size, age,
gender and physical capabilities:
the video evidence shows the complainant and the defendant
together, but the recording was unsteady and in constant movement, so it was
difficult to determine a difference in stature except to say it appears the
defendant is taller than the complainant, but i am unable to say to what
degree.
the defendant was of a slight stature, weighing almost
50lbs less than the complainant.
there was no evidence about the parties’ physical
capabilities, and neither was questioned about their relative strength,
although mr. hind knew the complainant to be able to hold her own, and she had
already acted out with violence by throwing an object.
relationship
between the parties prior to the assault:
there was no prior relationship between
the parties whatsoever.  in the hour leading up to the punch, everyone was
getting along well until the verbal exchange. there has been no contact between
the parties since that evening/morning.
the only observations and knowledge the
defendant had about the complainant was her large, outspoken personality, and
that instead of avoiding conflict with him when she had the opportunity, she was
committed to it, if not pursued it.
based on the facts i have found, the
complainant acted in a manner that was objectively aggressive and unnecessary
and threatening. the complainant’s intoxication made her behaviour even more
unpredictable.
nature
and proportionality of the response:
there has been much ink spilled on proportionality,
including whether a defendant has an obligation to flee, as discussed above.
however, the case law is clear that a defendant is not, “required to measure
his response to a nicety” (
r
v.
mcphee
,
2018 onca 1016
, at para.
24
;
see also
r
. v.
baxter
(1975),
1975 canlii 1510 (on ca)
,
27 ccc (2d) 96
)
.
as the court of appeal observed
in
r
v.
cunha
,
2016 onca
491
, at para.
25
: "the court must be
alive to the fact that people in stressful and dangerous situations do not have
time for subtle reflection."
the defendant attempted to retreat as
his first recourse.  he left the complainant’s home. he had no safe retreat
except his friends’ vehicles.  he was not the driver and did not have the
keys.  once the drivers were in the vehicles, the males left.
the defendant’s male companions were of
no assistance to him.
even when the males were in the
vehicles (after the punch),  this did not deter the complainant and she continued
to pursue them.
on the facts the crown has established
beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant struck the complainant only once, which
was effective in pausing the complainant’s pursuit momentarily.
the
amount of force used was no more than reaso
nably
necessary to stop her pursuit and threat of force.
therefore, on the totality of the
credible evidence, the crown has not met its burden in this matter, and i
therefore dismiss the charge against the defendant.
released:  january 22, 2025
signed:
justice v.l. brown