ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. coulter
, 2025 oncj 206
date:  2025 04 15
court file no.:  windsor
23-81104870
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
kevin
coulter
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 9
december 2024
reasons for
judgment released on 15 april 2025
bahaar chaudhry............................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alyssa jervis................................................................................
counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:
on
9 december 2024, the defendant kevin coulter pleaded guilty to two offences and
not guilty to one offence.  that third offence accuses him of possessing
fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 5(2) of the controlled
drugs and substances act (“the act”).  a trial of an issue was held to
determine if his admitted possession was for that purpose, or if he should be
found guilty of simple possession contrary to s. 4(1) of the act.
following
the calling of evidence, the parties filed written submissions.
facts
on
23 october 2023, the windsor police service began an investigation into stolen
property.  this investigation included conducting surveillance on the
defendant.
on
25 october 2023 the defendant was seen exiting 33-10200 menard street in
windsor.  he was carrying a shoe box when he entered the passenger seat of a
grey cadillac.  in the driver’s seat was a female believed to be jennifer
conley.  ms. conley is noteworthy because at the time, the defendant was on a
release condition prohibiting contact with her.  he was also on a condition to
remain in his residence or on the property of his residence at all times unless
in the company of his surety.  when the cadillac left the menard street
residence, the defendant was not in the company of his surety.
the
vehicle was followed to a tim hortons at 7852 wyandotte street east.  the
defendant exited the vehicle and, with a satchel slung over his shoulder,
entered the restaurant.
believing
the defendant to be in breach of his release conditions, police arrested him.
a search incident to arrest discovered the following:
(1)
a
pair of brass knuckles in his pocket.
(2)
a
2”x3” baggie with 12.8g of suspected brown fentanyl, identified by police as
item a.
(3)
a
2”x3” baggie with 8g of suspected white fentanyl, identified by police as item
b.
(4)
8g
of suspected brown fentanyl wrapped in cellophane, identified by police as item
c.
(5)
a
1”x1” baggie with 9.5 tablets of suspected 8mg dilaudid, identified by police
as item d.
(6)
$135
in canadian currency, though the photograph of the money seized shows a total
of $140.
samples
of items a, b, and d were sent to health canada for analysis.  item a was
confirmed to be fentanyl.  item b was determined to be cocaine.  item d was
confirmed to be hydromorphone, the chemical name of dilaudid.
i
have no evidence that item c was ever tested.  it was conceded, however, that
at the time of his arrest, the defendant was in possession of 20.8g of
fentanyl.  this necessarily means it is conceded that item c was, in fact,
fentanyl.
the trial of an issue
while
pleas of guilt were entered on counts 1 and 3, the breach of a release order
and possession of a prohibited weapon, a plea of not guilty was entered on
count 4.  the sole issue to be determined on that count was whether the crown
had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s possession of the
fentanyl was for the purpose of trafficking.
in
support of that contention, the crown called pc elena revenberg.  pc revenberg
was a member of the windsor police drugs and guns enforcement unit and
testified to having significant experience dealing with the drug subculture.
following a voir dire into her qualifications, it was admitted she could
provide expert evidence in the areas of pricing, quantity, rate of consumption,
indicia of trafficking, distribution and methods of personal use and
consumption with regard to fentanyl.  she was so qualified.
pc
revenberg’s report was filed as an exhibit.  i have concerns about the report
as presented.
firstly,
the officer bases her opinion that the fentanyl in question was possessed for
the purpose of trafficking on the facts she set out.  those facts include the
seizure of 28.8g of fentanyl.  that assertion is not borne out by the agreed
statement of facts.  the total admitted quantity of fentanyl is 20.8g.  it
would appear that the officer is including the 8g of suspected fentanyl
(ultimately determined to be cocaine) in the total.  the problem with that
inclusion – apart from it being factually incorrect – is the health canada
certificate of analysis confirming item b to be cocaine is dated 8 december
2023 and the officer’s report is dated 5 july 2024.  this implies the report
was completed without reference to the certificate.  i don’t immediately
understand why a report would be completed without considering the results of
health canada’s analysis of the actual substances.
i
do note that on page 4 of the report, at paragraph 14, an amount referring to
the seized fentanyl is redacted and replaced with a handwritten “20.8”.  this
change is not signed or initialled, and it is not clear who made it.  at
paragraph 17 of the report, the amount of 28.8g is again mentioned.
secondly,
the officer includes in the list of seized drugs 12.8g of crystal
methamphetamine.  nowhere in the agreed statement of facts is crystal
methamphetamine ever mentioned.  i have no evidence this drug was ever found on
the defendant or is otherwise relevant to this case (aside from his own
testimony in court), but it was included in the officer’s report.  there are
other portions of the report that have been redacted, so perhaps it is
mentioned there.  on the evidence i have, however, there is no other reference in
the crown’s case to crystal methamphetamine.  this causes me to question the
basis for the officer’s eventual opinion as stated.
if
the officer’s evidence was limited to her report, i would have difficulty
placing significant weight on her opinion for the reasons i’ve noted.  but that
was not the only source of her evidence.  she also testified.
in
her testimony, pc revenberg was given a hypothetical situation where a person
was in possession of 20.8g of fentanyl.  she was asked if she could form an
opinion regarding trafficking or personal use based on that amount.  she opined
such an amount would necessarily be for trafficking, saying that for even a
heavy user, that represented about ten days’ worth of supply.  in her
experience, it would be very unusual for a person to carry ten days of drugs
around with them as doing so would increase their liability if discovered by
police and would increase their risk of being robbed by other users.
the
officer was then asked if the fentanyl being separated into two packages, one
of 12.8g and the other of 8g, would change her opinion.  she said it would
not.  the 12.8g package was just under half an ounce while the 8g package was
just over a quarter of an ounce.  both those quantities are commonly used
amounts in trafficking.
she
was then asked if the addition of 8g of cocaine and 9.5 tablets of dilaudid
would affect her opinion.  again, she said it would not.  she noted that drug
sellers often sell more than one type of drug, as in her words, buyers “want
variety”.
pc
revenberg was also asked about usage rates.  she testified that moderate users
of fentanyl might consume 0.5-1g per day, while chronic users might consume
1-2g per day.  she acknowledged that a person’s tolerance would increase with
continued use, and that a person coming to fentanyl after using other drugs
would likely start with a higher tolerance than someone without such a history.
based
on the officer’s estimates, if the defendant is a high-end chronic user, the
amount of fentanyl seized from him represents approximately ten days’ worth of
product.
returning
to pc revenberg’s report, there is another disconnect between what she relied on
and what is in the agreed statement of facts.
in
the report under “synopsis of the investigation”, the officer says the
following, starting at paragraph 11:
11. on wednesday, october 251h, 2023, windsor police target base
officers initiated an investigation into kevin coulter who was believed to be a
suspect in a break and enter. officers believed coulter was in possession of
stolen property as viewed on open source media. officers were able to set up a
purchase using an undercover online operator. officers arranged a meeting
location with coulter using an officer in an undercover capacity.
12. at 11:09 am, coulter arrived at the location and officers
placed coulter under arrest for fail to comply with release order.
13. search incident to arrest officers located the confirmed
stolen nike running shoes, a pair of brass knuckles, a quantity of fentanyl and
hydromorphone tablets, and $135 of canadian currency on his person. coulter was
further charged with traffic in property obtained by crime not
exceeding
$5000, possession of a prohibited weapon, and possession of a schedule 1
substance for the purpose of trafficking.
the
fact that it was police who had arranged the defendant’s attendance at tim
hortons was not included in the agreed statement of facts.  likewise, the
agreed statement did not include the fact that the defendant in fact did have
shoes in his possession when arrested.  this corroborates his testimony that he
was only at the tim hortons to sell shoes.  not including these facts in the
agreed statement invites the inferences that he went to the restaurant on his
own initiative, and that his claim of selling shoes was not borne out by the
results of the search.  these are important points that should have been
included.
the
defendant also testified.  he admitted to being a heavy user of fentanyl.  he
said he was using “around a ball a day” at the time of his arrest.  pc
revenberg defined a ball as being 3.5g.  this would place the defendant at nearly
double the daily use of even the chronic user described by the officer.
he
said he had purchased an ounce of fentanyl the night before his arrest.  he
preferred to carry his drugs with him at all times as he didn’t want them to be
stolen.
the
defendant disputed the street values testified to by pc revenberg.  while she
said a ball would cost $350-500 and an ounce $1,500-2,500, he said he would pay
about $100 for a ball and rarely paid more than $400 for an ounce.  the officer
agreed prices had dropped in recent years, but the defendant’s estimates would
represent a decrease of more than 60% from her evidence.  given that her
estimates come from multiple sources, including confidential informants and
other officers, it seems unlikely her approximated values would be so
inaccurate.
the
defendant was asked about his consumption of crystal methamphetamine.  his
answers to these questions were internally inconsistent.  he said he consumed less
than 1g per day.  he also said he typically purchased it an ounce at a time,
i.e. 28g at once.  he then said he would purchase it 2-3 times per month.
those numbers, respectfully, do not add up.  smoking less than 1g per day would
mean a single ounce is more than enough for a month.  why would he then be
buying 2-3 ounces a month?
i
also consider the defendant’s evidence on his financial status.  his only
income, he said, was a $1,000 monthly payment from the children’s aid society.
he testified that he would buy 2-3 ounces of crystal methamphetamine per month
at a cost he estimated to be $100 per ounce.  he would also buy 2-3 ounces per
month of fentanyl, which cost him between $200-300 each.  regarding his
residence, he said he rented a five-bedroom house for $2,000 a month and had
several roommates to help defray the cost.  at one point in his testimony, he
guessed that he personally paid $300-400 per month towards rent.  elsewhere, he
said three people (presumably including the defendant, but it wasn’t clear)
each paid between $600-700 per month.
in
total then, according to the defendant’s own testimony, his total monthly drug
expenses were, at the low end, $600 per month, and at the high end, $1,200 per
month.  rent, depending on which part of his testimony is accepted, was as low
as $300 and as high as $700.  his total monthly expenses, paid for by a single
$1,000 cas payment, were between $900-1,900.  he did testify to making some
money buying and selling bicycles on facebook marketplace, but could offer no
detail about how much income this business generated.  at best, the defendant
had $100 each month to buy food and other necessities.  at worst, he was
overdrawn by $900 every month with no explanation for how he was covering that
overage.
the
focus of the defendant’s evidence was his claim that the drugs in his
possession at the time of his arrest were for his own personal use.  he did not
have them with the intention of trafficking.
i
have considered the defendant’s evidence in accordance with the principles of
r.
v.
w.d.
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 742
.  taking all of his evidence into account
and assessing it against the totality of the evidence i have heard, i conclude
that i do not believe him.
in
my view, the defendant’s evidence was inconsistent on key points.  his claim of
how much crystal methamphetamine he consumed was not in line with the amount he
said he would purchase.  on his own evidence, he purchased double or triple the
amount he personally needed every month.
on
the issue of his residence, his living arrangements changed throughout his
testimony.  his rent could have been $300, or it could have been more than
double that.  he did not provide a consistent response.
overall,
one would think that a person whose only income is a single $1,000 payment
would be more aware of how much he was paying for daily necessities.  i also
note that the defendant was sufficiently price-conscious that he said he would
buy drugs  in bulk to take advantage of discounts but couldn’t say what he paid
for food or rent.  his inconsistent, incomplete answers prevent me from
accepting his evidence that the drugs were all for personal use.
turning
to the second prong of the
w.d.
test,
i must consider if the defendant’s
evidence has left me with a reasonable doubt.  this is a lower bar.  i can
disbelieve evidence but still be left with a reasonable doubt by it.
again,
i must consider the defence evidence in the context of all the evidence i
heard.  no one witness or piece of evidence can be considered in a silo.  i
therefore assess the defendant’s claim holistically to see if the evidence
leaves me with a reasonable doubt.
the
defendant was arrested in possession of four different controlled substances.
he had a total of 20.8g of fentanyl, 8g of cocaine, and 9.5 tablets of
dilaudid.  the fentanyl was separated into two packages.  the cocaine and
dilaudid were similarly separately packaged.  he also had a quantity of money
on him, though it was not a large amount.
i
heard no evidence that the defendant was a user of either cocaine or dilaudid.
he testified to using crystal methamphetamine and fentanyl, but nothing else.
why, then, was he carrying other controlled substances?  to be clear, there is
no burden on the defendant to answer that question.  it is a relevant question,
however, when i consider the inferences available to be drawn from the evidence.
the
defendant testified that he carried all his drugs on his person because he
didn’t want to leave them somewhere that could have been insecure.  accepting
that evidence does not preclude a finding that he was possessing the drugs for
the purpose of trafficking.  a dealer, just as much as a user, could choose to
carry their inventory around with them.  his assertion that he didn’t want to
leave his stash at his residence does not weaken the crown’s claim that he was
intending to sell it.
on
that point, the amount and variety of drugs he was carrying militate in favour
of a finding that he was looking to traffic the drugs he held.  even if i
accept his claim of using 3.5g of fentanyl per day, which as i said would put
him at nearly double the daily usage level of a chronic user in pc revenberg’s
opinion, that still means he had nearly six days’ worth in his possession.  if
his usage was closer to 2g a day, it would be ten days’ worth.  on top of that
he had a baggie of pills and just over a quarter ounce of cocaine.
he
was also carrying a weapon on arrest in the form of brass knuckles.  weapons,
including brass knuckles, go hand-in-hand with the drug trade given the
monetary value of the merchandise (see:
r.
v.
nair
b.c.j.
no. 1455 (p.c.)
,
r.
v.
learning
b.c.j. no. 1777 (s.c.)
,
r.
v.
murphy
o.j. no. 255 (s.c.j.)
,
r.
v.
farquharson
o.j. no. 5868 (s.c.j.)
).
taking
all the evidence into account, i find the evidence of the defendant does not
leave me with a reasonable doubt on the issue of why he was in possession of
the fentanyl.
finally,
i turn to the third prong of the
w.d.
test.
on the basis of the
evidence i do accept, has the crown proved the charged offence beyond a
reasonable doubt?
this
stage of my analysis requires me to consider the nature and use of
circumstantial evidence.  i have no direct evidence that the defendant was
possessing the fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking; the crown instead
points to the surrounding circumstances to argue the defendant’s guilt is the
only reasonable inference available to be drawn.
the
supreme court of canada reviewed circumstantial evidence
in the case of
r.
v.
villaroman
2016 scc 33
.  before a trier of fact can convict a
defendant on the basis of circumstantial evidence, it must find that guilt is
the only reasonable inference available to be drawn from the evidence.  it does
not have to be the only
possible
inference.  the crown is not required
to negate every other possibility disclosed by the evidence.  but it must be
the only reasonable inference.  if there is another such inference that points
away from guilt, the crown will have failed to meet its burden.
the
question to be answered at this stage is whether the defendant possessing the
fentanyl, in the arrangement and quantity admitted, for the purpose of
trafficking is the only reasonable inference i can draw.
that
the drugs in the defendant’s possession were for his own personal use is
certainly an inference i can draw.  but is it reasonable?  in my view, it is
not.
the
first reason for that conclusion is the sheer amount of fentanyl he was
carrying.  even if i accept the defendant’s evidence as to his usage level,
this was nearly a week’s supply.  on the more likely usage level testified to
by pc revenberg, it’s 10 days’ worth.  i do not accept that a person,
especially a person with their own residence, would carry that quantity around
with them solely out of concern for its security.  if the defendant had no
residence, or was living in shelters, i may have come to a different
conclusion.  but he wasn’t.
the
second reason is the packaging of the fentanyl in his possession.  he testified
to buying an ounce the previous evening.  he was not, however, in possession of
the 20.8g in one bag.  there was 12.8g in one bag, and 8g in another.  these
amounts are significant as they are near to commonly sold amounts.  this
strongly supports the inference that they were packaged not for personal use,
but for sale.
the
third reason is the variety of drugs the defendant was carrying on arrest.  in
addition to a large quantity of fentanyl, he also had 8g of cocaine (again just
about a quarter-ounce) and 9.5 tablets of dilaudid.  in his testimony about his
own drug use, he never mentioned personally using either drug.  so why did he
have them?  again, there is no burden on him to offer an explanation.  on the
evidence i have, however, the only reasonable inference is that he possessed
all the drugs, including the fentanyl, to sell them.
result
considering
all the evidence, i find the only reasonable inference available to be drawn is
that the defendant possessed the fentanyl in question for the purpose of
trafficking it.  the amount of fentanyl, its packaging, and the surrounding
circumstances, all lead inexorably to this conclusion.
it
was argued that perhaps the defendant’s willingness to share his drugs with
others could also meet the definition of trafficking, and that therefore,
possessing his drugs with the intention of sharing them could also satisfy s.
5(2) of the act.  in my view, i do not need to decide this point.  the
circumstances of his possession, as outlined, make out the offence without
resort to this theory.
the
defendant will be found guilty of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking.
i
conclude by repeating my concern about the deficiencies in pc revenberg’s
report as it was presented, and about the failure to mention the shoes in the
agreed statement of facts.
if
changes are made to an expert’s report, as happened here, those changes should
be signed by the expert and explained.  a trier of fact should not have to
piece together the basis for the expert’s opinion based on partially redacted
information.  and, if there is other evidence in the report not meant to be
heard by the court (for example, perhaps, the mention of crystal
methamphetamine) redactions must be made of all mentions of it, not just most
of them.
similarly,
a trier of fact should not have to rely on the narrative of an expert report to
provide important evidence missing from the agreed statement.  when an agreed
statement is filed, it should be a complete and comprehensive record of all
relevant evidence that stands on its own.  the trier of fact should not have to
go looking elsewhere to supplement it.
we
will proceed to sentencing.
released:
15 april 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt