ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. amankwaah
, 2025 oncj 463
date:
2025 01 23
court
file no.:  toronto 4810 998 24 48106134-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
dwumo amankwaah
before
justice christine mainville
heard
on january 13-17, 2025
reasons
on voluntariness released on january 23, 2025
sandra duffey..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ben elzingacheng........................................................................
counsel for the accused
mainville j.:
mr. amankwaah is charged with attempt murder, assault with a
weapon, and fail to comply with probation in relation to a stabbing that
occurred on february 9, 2024.
the police arrested and interviewed him the next day in relation
to these events. he denied being involved, telling the police they had the
wrong guy. he did however answer certain questions and made utterances the
crown now seeks to rely on.
these utterances given to a person in authority are presumptively
inadmissible. before admitting them in evidence, the confessions rule requires
the crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that they were made voluntarily. i
must assess whether the accused had a meaningful choice to give a statement and
whether his will was overborne. the onus on the crown is a high one.
the crown argues that it has discharged its burden to prove that
mr. amankwaah’s statement to the police was provided freely and voluntarily.
the defence challenges the voluntariness of this statement,
pointing to the entirety of the circumstances in which mr. amankwaah found
himself. in particular, it points to the fact that force was applied to mr. amankwaah
during his arrest, and that he was interviewed by the same officers who
participated in this arrest and application of force.
specifically, d/c rohrbach tackled mr. amankwaah to the ground
upon encountering him, to ensure police safety and effect the arrest. his
partner d/c chen was also involved in this arrest and led the questioning of
mr. amankwaah. d/c rohrbach assisted d/c chen in conducting the interview,
including some of the questioning.
the defence concedes that other than this use of force, mr. amankwaah
was not assaulted or threatened. no promises were made, and no inducements were
offered in exchange for a statement or his cooperation. he had the opportunity
to speak to duty counsel prior to the interview, and the police made some
efforts to reach who they understood to be his counsel of choice. mr. amankwaah
indicated he was satisfied with the advice he had received. the defence
acknowledges that the police did not treat him poorly. it also concedes that
nothing occurred during mr. amankwaah’s transport to the police station (by
other officers) or his booking that would raise a doubt regarding the
voluntariness of his subsequent statement to the police.
mr. amankwaah was arrested around 7 pm on february 10, 2024, and
read his rights to counsel shortly thereafter. he was also cautioned regarding
his right to silence at this time. the police interview lasted just short of 30
minutes, from 9:26 to 9:55 pm.
over the course of the interview, mr. amankwaah did advise the
officers approximately six times that he did not wish to make a statement or
say anything further, declined twice to look at anything further, and asked
approximately four times to return to his cell. the defence however recognizes
that, as per
r. v. singh
,
2007 scc 48
, this does not in and of itself
render the statement involuntary. it does however form part of the overall
circumstances i must consider in deciding whether the statement was made
voluntarily:
singh
, at para.
53
.
the defence does not argue that there was excessive use of force.
it acknowledges that the manner of arrest may have been appropriate having
regard to officer and public safety. i agree with this assessment. the force
used to arrest the accused in this case was justified, and not excessive. the
application of force was not gratuitous, nor was it an uncontrolled application
of force that would be expected to cause pain or injury. it was what was needed
to bring mr. amankwaah to the ground promptly to conduct the arrest and ensure
officer safety, given the possible presence of a weapon, in particular a knife.
the defence also acknowledges that even excessive force does not
necessarily render a statement involuntary. again, i must assess all the
circumstances in determining the voluntariness of a statement made to authority
figures.
i was not provided with any caselaw where the issue of the same
police officer being both interviewer and arresting officer was raised. i
nevertheless accept that in some circumstances where the police resort to force
to effect an arrest, the arresting officer later participating in the
arrestee’s interview could be cause for concern in the voluntariness analysis –
especially where the officer does not address that occurrence directly with the
suspect after the fact, as was the case here.
in this case, d/c rorhback explained that though he does not
believe he turned his mind to this at the time, his subsequent interactions
with the accused – parading him, bringing him from the cells to the interview
room, and during the interview – were professional. he did not engage with him
in the same manner as when he took him down. he effectively changed hats after
the arrest and acted non-aggressively with mr. amankwaah from that point on.
indeed, d/c rohrbach perceived their subsequent interactions to be very light-handed
in terms of physical control, and felt there was a different relationship
between them. during the interview, he perceived mr. amankwaah to be laid back
or relaxed in his chair, and never had the impression that he felt intimidated
by him or d/c chen.
while i must consider mr. amankwaah’s perception and feelings,
rather than those of the police, d/c rohrbach’s account of their interactions
following the arrest is borne out by the video and audio recording of the
interview.
in
r. v. sabri
, (2002)
2002 canlii 44974 (on ca)
, 166 c.c.c. (3d) 179, at para.
12
,
the court deemed that statements made by the accused to the police were
involuntary as a result of the accused having been assaulted by one of the
officers. the fact that some time had passed between the assault and the
impugned statements did not serve to dissociate these and render the later
statements voluntary.
the circumstances in that case however were very different than
what took place here. in
sabri
, the assault was a gratuitous one that
took place after the accused was already in police custody. it did not relate
to what could be characterized as proper police procedure in executing an
arrest. the use of gratuitous violence against a prisoner by the police, once
in their custody, could certainly incite fear of prejudice:
sabri
, at
para.
19
. by contrast, the application of force as necessary to effect an
arrest would generally be perceived as just that: what was necessary for the
police to execute their duties. it would not signal to a suspect that the
police may resort to gratuitous violence if he does not provide a statement or
otherwise comply, especially in circumstances where the police subsequently act
in an unaggressive manner, as i accept they did here.
moreover, a key part of the analysis in
sabri
was that the
officer had denied assaulting the accused. in finding that the accused was in
fact assaulted, the officer’s credibility was entirely undermined. this was
significant, in particular in the context of unrecorded interactions with the accused
and a first statement that was not the subject of a recording: see
sabri
,
at paras.
16-18
.
furthermore, in the present case, there was no reference to
giving a statement or cooperating with the police at the time of the tackle
(only reference to his right
not
to make any such statement), and no
reference to the arrest or earlier tackle throughout the duration of the
questioning. this serves to further distance the application of force from the accused’s
questioning and related utterances.
the defence also argued that the analysis should account for the
fact that mr. amankwaah is a black man from the jane and finch area of toronto
in police custody, and that that would inform his perception of whether he has
any choice but to cooperate and provide a statement. he points to the fact that
mr. amankwaah was fully compliant with the police from the time of his arrest.
i acknowledge that in certain circumstances, being a black man
interacting with the police may give a suspect more cause for concern and
inform that person’s view of whether he has a real choice in speaking to the
police. but i have no indication that that was the case here, and i have not
been pointed to any jurisprudence suggesting that that can be inferred in any
case: see, for e.g.
r. v. blake
,
2024 onsc 3309
, at paras.
30-31
. this
is unlike youth or accused persons with mental illnesses or disabilities, who –
based on empirical data – present a much greater risk of falsely confessing:
see
r. v. hart
,
2014 scc 52
, at para.
103
.
while the accused in the present case was taking medication for a
mental illness, the police obtained confirmation prior to starting the
interview that he had recently received his medication. the defence does not
raise mental illness as a particular concern in the present analysis.
in any event, and while i consider the accused’s relevant
individual characteristics in the analysis, the above factors would not in
themselves render a statement involuntary. i must instead consider all relevant
circumstances.
the video-interview in this case makes plain that mr. amankwaah
was not intimidated, pressured or coerced into making a statement and that he
voluntarily chose to say the things he said.
as the crown pointed out, from the very beginning of the
interview, mr. amankwaah made clear what his position was: the police had the
wrong man. he wanted to convey this to the police and was in my view eager to
provide them with at least some information that he believed might exculpate
him.
after he was again cautioned and confirmed that he had spoken
with duty counsel and was satisfied with the advice he had received, mr.
amankwaah is asked if he wants a tissue or napkin. he declines, stating he is
fine.
as soon as he is told he has an opportunity to tell them why they
have the wrong person, as he had alluded to during the reading of the caution,
mr. amankwaah responds. when he is confronted with the fact that others have
implicated him, he responds, explaining how he could not be the person they are
looking for. it is not until several clarifying and probing questions are asked
and answered that mr. amankwaah first indicates that he does not want to make a
statement.
officer chen proceeds to explain that they are not here to force
him to make a statement. mr. amankwaah appears to understand this, responding
“yeah, and i’m not talking here”. he is told that he can just listen.
as soon as the officer starts asking questions again about his
daily activities, however, mr. amankwaah responds. he proceeds to answer all
the questions asked of him, before starting to ask questions of his own. he
looks at photos shown to him, and comments on them unprompted by any
questioning.
when he reverts back to saying he does not want to make any
statements and he is tired of this, the officer reiterates that he can just
listen and doesn’t have to say anything. mr. amankwaah indicates he doesn’t
want to hear this anymore and proceeds to claim his innocence. the officer then
raises the prospect of dna on his clothing, and mr. amankwaah immediately begins
to engage again.
mr. amankwaah then demonstrates his understanding of his right to
remain silent when he questions why the officer is still asking him questions,
stating “i don’t have to answer any questions”. the officer again reiterates
that indeed he doesn’t, but the police can ask. mr. amankwaah characterizes the
questioning as “annoying”.
after mr. amankwaah again reiterates that he doesn’t want to see
any other pictures, the officer mentions that they have information that he
went down to the laundry room. mr. amankwaah immediately asks to see that,
stating “show me, show me”. he then comments on the surveillance pictures shown
to him.
when mr. amankwaah then returns to saying he is done answering questions,
the officer reiterates once again that he doesn’t have to answer, then states
that mr. amankwaah has told him his story, so he now wants to show him what the
police have. mr. amankwaah acquiesces and proceeds to comment on what is shown
to him.
he finally becomes a bit more insistent about returning to his
cell and not wanting to know about these things anymore. the officer asks him
to hear him out and states “don’t talk, that’s fine.” mr. amankwaah eventually
begins interacting with the officers again, making comments and asking questions.
this continues until the officers wrap up the questioning in answer to mr.
amankwaah reiterating that he wants to go to his cell and no longer answer questions.
certainly, persistence in questioning over the accused’s repeated
objections is a relevant factor to take into account in the contextual analysis
of voluntariness:
singh
, at paras.
53-54
. but the ultimate question is
“whether the accused exercised free will by choosing to make a statement”:
singh
,
at para.
53
;
r. v. oickle
,
2000 scc 38
, at para.
57
.
mr. amankwaah repeatedly evidenced equivocation as to whether he
wanted to speak to the police or not. this is not a case where the police
“broke” a suspect who was otherwise remaining silent, and who gave up after
repeated or prolonged questioning. rather than persistently maintaining that he
did not want to talk, the accused talked and intermittently stated that he no
longer wanted to talk.
this case can be distinguished from cases such as
r. v. el
hariti and haddouche
,
2017 onsc 3144
, at paras.
6
, 11-17, 34-35, where
there was a clear and unequivocal persistence in remaining silent.
mr. amankwaah was talkative from the outset. he did not succumb
to pressure, fear, intimidation or any other form of oppression. rather, he
went back and forth between answering questions and deciding that he had had
enough. he appeared confident in the face of police questioning, and firmly put
forward his position.
when mr. amankwaah did exercise his right to remain silent, the
police generally reiterated that he did not have to answer their questions, but
they were going to ask them. this caution was also relayed to mr. amankwaah at
the scene of his arrest and at the outset of the interview. mr. amankwaah made
clear he understood.
in the circumstances of this case, mr. amankwaah’s temporary
unwillingness to answer certain questions at certain points in the interview
did not amount to a denial of a meaningful choice to remain silent.
altogether, the circumstances surrounding the statements made by
mr. amankwaah were not such as to raise a doubt as to their voluntariness. the
statements made over the course of his videotaped interview with the police are
admissible in evidence.
released:  january 23, 2025
signed:
justice c. mainville