citation:
r.
v. mcdonald
, 2025 oncj 126
date:  2025·03·04
toronto
region
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his majesty  the  king
—  and  —
philip mcdonald
before
justice peter scrutton
heard
on february 19, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 4, 2025
t. curley....................................................................................................................
for the crown
c. levien.................................................................................................................
for the accused
scrutton j.:
overview
philip mcdonald is charged with theft of a
motor vehicle, possession of property obtained by crime, and being masked with
the intent to commit an indictable offence. the main issues at this trial are
whether the crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. mcdonald was
the masked person shown on surveillance video driving a very recently stolen
land rover in the early morning hours of january 6, 2024 and, if so, whether
the crown has proved that he stole the land rover or knew that it was stolen at
the time he possessed it. the crown’s evidence against mr. mcdonald is entirely
circumstantial.  all of the evidence in this trial was tendered as part of an
agreed statement of facts.  it is commendable how efficiently counsel dealt
with the non-contentious evidence in this matter.
the evidence
shortly after 4:00 a.m. on january 6, 2024,
a 2022 land rover defender bearing ontario licence plate cvya 631 was stolen
from a toronto driveway.  at the time of the theft, the vehicle’s gas tank was
only 1/8 full; the suv contained the owner’s registration documents and some of
her personal effects.
gps data from the suv establishes its
location from the time it was stolen to the time it was ultimately recovered by
the police later on january 6
th
.   its engine started in the owner’s
driveway at approximately 4:11 a.m.  the vehicle drove to the northwest part of
the city and turned off at 5:04 a.m.  by then, it had travelled 30.1 km.  it
was parked in a lot at 165 la rose ave., where it remained until recovered.  during
the time it was mobile, it stopped in the pine point area of the city, where
the owner’s belongings were jettisoned, then stopped again at an esso gas
station at 2291 islington avenue.  it is possible but not certain that the
vehicle made other very brief stops during its journey.
the esso gas station was equipped with cctv
cameras.  police obtained footage of the land rover’s stop there.  the
surveillance footage shows:
•
the
land rover pull into pumps at 4:50 a.m., accompanied by a black acura tlx sedan
bearing ontario marker dbbp 291, which pulled into adjacent pumps;
•
the
driver of the land rover gets out, walks around the vehicle, opens the gas tank
and then walks to the entrance of the gas station;
•
the
driver of the acura gets out and walks to the entrance of the gas station;
•
the two men speak
outside the station before entering it and waiting in line next to each other;
•
the
land rover’s driver pays for gas with cash and leaves the store;
•
he is wearing a
black balaclava such that only his eye area is visible.  he is a black man, of
slim build, wearing black, white, blue and yellow sneakers, a black hooded
sweatshirt with the hood over his head, and a dark coat;
•
the
land rover’s driver fills it up with gas;
•
the
acura’s driver pays for gas in cash and leaves the store, filling the car up;
•
he
is wearing a black balaclava but some of his face is visible;
•
he is a black man
wearing a black and grey nike hooded sweatshirt and pants, with the hood over
his head, black nike air force one sneakers, and a black winter jacket.
on february 21, 2024, six weeks after the
theft, toronto police officers observed the acura tlx sedan with the same
license marker; it was of interest to them because of the january 6
th
theft investigation.  two people were in the vehicle.  officers conducted a
traffic stop and arrested the occupants.  the driver of the acura was
identified as the defendant, phillip paul mcdonald.  the passenger was
identified as mekhi richardson.
stills of mr. mcdonald taken from his
arresting officer’s body-worn camera (“bwc”) were entered into evidence at this
trial, as were soco images of his attire that day.
the parties’ positions
the
crown relies on the common
characteristics of the clothing worn by the man driving the land rover in the
gas station and mr. mcdonald’s clothing upon arrest, in addition to the
presence of the same acura sedan at both times, as proof that mr. mcdonald was
the driver of the stolen suv.  crown counsel relies on the doctrine of recent
possession to support the theory that mr. mcdonald stole the vehicle.
defence counsel points to the popularity of
jackets and sneakers in these styles, the lack of any identifiable facial
features on the man in the gas station, and the gap in time between the theft
and the defendant’s arrest, as undermining the probative value of evidence
relating to the clothing.  he further submits that, regardless of identification,
the crown has not proved that the man driving the suv stole it or knew that it
was stolen, given the absence of any of the common indicia of theft such as a damaged
window, door, or ignition.
relevant legal principles
mr. mcdonald is presumed innocent of these
charges.  the crown must prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, a burden
which never shifts.  mr. mcdonald can only be found guilty of an offence if,
after considering all of the evidence, the crown has proved each element of
each offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  if i am not sure, based on all of the
evidence, or the lack of evidence, that mr. mcdonald committed an offence, i
must find him not guilty of it.
in order to establish mr. mcdonald’s guilt,
the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was the driver of the
land rover captured on the esso surveillance footage on january 6 and, with
respect to the possession of property charge, that he knew that the land rover
was obtained by crime.  with respect to the theft charge, the crown must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. mcdonald was involved in the theft either as
a principal or a party.
because the case against mr. mcdonald is
circumstantial, not only in terms of the identity of the driver but also of the
driver’s knowledge that the vehicle was stolen and the driver’s participation
in the theft, he may only be found guilty of an offence if his guilt is the
only reasonable inference that the evidence permits:
r. v. villaroman
,
2016 scc 33
.
factual findings with respect to
identification evidence
i will begin by analyzing the evidence that
is probative of the identity of the land rover’s driver because, if the crown
has not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. mcdonald was the driver, he
must necessarily be found not guilty of each offence.  close review of the esso
surveillance footage and its stills establish the following specific features
of the land rover driver’s attire:
•
black
and white sneakers; with yellow soles and clear air bubbles (or “pockets”)
visible on the midsoles; what appear to be black laces; blue and red visible
above the heel on the back of the shoe;
•
a
dark, zippered, hooded winter parka; hip length (
i.e.
falling below the
waist);  the zipper extends to the top of the jacket such that if fully zipped
it would cover the entirety of the neck area up to and possibly over the chin;
a separate layer of fabric running parallel to the zipper on the outside of the
jacket has two visible velcro patches on one side at the top part of the
jacket; the jacket has a black/charcoal and grey pattern that looks almost like
camouflage;
and
•
there
are no identifying features on the balaclava except for the fact that it is
black and capable of covering the entire head and face area save for the eyes.
review of the bwc footage from mr.
mcdonald’s arrest establishes that he was wearing:
•
black
and white sneakers with yellow soles;
•
a
dark winter parka, with a separate layer of fabric next to the zipper with two
visible velcro patches on one side of the top part of the jacket; and
•
a
black balaclava capable of covering his entire face except the eyes.
review of the soco photos of these items
establishes:
•
the
sneakers are black, white and blue, with yellow soles; red “nike air” lettering
and logo and blue fabric on the back above the heal; “air jordan” logos at the
top of the tongues; and visible air bubbles/pockets in the midsoles.  these
shoes are unlaced, with visible lace eyelets;
•
the
hooded winter parka bears a north face logo and has a black or charcoal and
grey pattern, almost like a camouflage; and
•
the
balaclava has a small white nike swoosh logo on the top above the left side of
the forehead.
on my review of the esso footage, the
driver’s shoes appear to have black laces but the laces are not clearly
visible.  the shoes from mr. mcdonald’s arrest that are documented in soco
photos clearly have no laces.  curiously, in photo 66 of the bwc camera of mr.
mcdonald’s arrest, the right shoe, which is not entirely visible in the image,
has something black protruding from the tongue that looks very similar to what
appears to me to be the black shoelaces that are visible on the right foot of
the driver’s shoe in photo 46 (and other images) from the esso station. whether
the shoes were laced on january 6
th
and unlaced on february 21
st
,
though, has no bearing on whether they are the same product.
i am satisfied that the shoes and jacket
seen on the surveillance footage from the esso are the same brand and style as
those that mr. mcdonald was wearing upon his february 21
st
arrest.  the
black balaclava mr. mcdonald was wearing at the time of his arrest appears to
be consistent in colour, shape, and size with the balaclava worn by the man in
the esso but, because of the lack of any distinctive features other than the
small nike swoosh visible in the soco images (which would not have been visible
on the surveillance footage because of the hood worn by man in the esso
station), i cannot conclude that it is the identical product, only that it is
entirely consistent with the balaclava worn by the man at the gas station.
because of the popularity of these brands,
and the gap in time between the theft and the day that mr. mcdonald was
arrested in this attire, i cannot be satisfied that the man from the esso is mr.
mcdonald simply because they are both wearing the same kind of shoes, jacket,
and the same style of balaclava, although the combination of these three items
certainly supports that inference.
but that is not the only evidence probative
of the issue of identification.  the fact the driver of the land rover at the
esso was associated with an acura tlx sedan bearing license plate number dbbp
291, and mr. mcdonald was arrested driving this car 6 weeks later, wearing the
same kind of shoes and jacket as worn by the man at the esso, and what could be
the same balaclava, is incredibly probative evidence of the issue of identity.  i
would not have been satisfied that mr. mcdonald was the driver of the stolen
suv based only on the clothing he was arrested in, or only because he was
driving the same acura that was associated with the theft but the cumulative
effect of this evidence leads cogently to the inference that he and the land
rover’s driver are one and the same.  in my view, no other inference is
reasonable.  i am satisfied that the crown has proved mr. mcdonald was the
driver of the land rover beyond a reasonable doubt.
factual findings with respect to
the charges
it is admitted that the land rover was
stolen. to prove that mr. mcdonald was the thief, the crown must prove that he
took it or that he was a party to its theft.  to prove that he was in
possession of property obtained by crime, the crown must prove that mr.
mcdonald knew the land rover was stolen, a finding which would flow necessarily
from the conclusion that he stole the land rover.
the doctrine of recent possession explains
the inference that is available from someone’s possession of recently stolen
goods.  in the absence of an explanation as to how the person came to possess
those goods, it is possible to infer that the person stole them or had
knowledge that the goods were stolen.
this
inference can be drawn even if there is no other evidence connecting the
accused to the theft:
r. v. kowalyk
,
1988 canlii 50 (scc)
,
2 s.c.r. 59
at para.
7
.
the
inference is not mandatory or presumptive and does not alter the crown’s burden
of proof.  the strength of the available inference is proportionate to the
recency of the theft and a consideration of all the other relevant
circumstances.
i have concluded that mr. mcdonald was in
possession of the land rover in the esso station.  his possession of the suv is
unexplained.  his possession of it at that time was very proximate to the theft
– only 39 minutes had elapsed since the suv left the owner’s driveway in the
mount pleasant and summerhill area of the city at 4:11 a.m. to when it pulled
into the esso station gas station at islington and rexdale at 4:50 a.m.  it
would have been immediately obvious to whoever stole the land rover that it would
soon need gas, as it had only 1/8 of a tank at the time it left the owner’s
home.
when i consider the fact of mr. mcdonald’s
possession of this vehicle, in the immediate aftermath of its theft, in what
can only be characterized as the dead of night or the earliest of morning
hours, a time when the vast majority of people are asleep or at least inside,
in winter, i am sure that the only reasonably available inference in all the
circumstances is that mr. mcdonald was involved in the land rover’s theft
either as a principal or as a party and that he was aware that it was stolen.
this inference is further supported by the
fact that the car that mr. mcdonald was driving on february 21 was being driven
by another man on january 6 who mr. mcdonald was associating with at the very
time he was in unlawful possession of the land rover.  i say this because, as a
matter of logic and common sense, it is reasonable to conclude that another
person and vehicle were involved in the land rover’s theft.  it would not,
strictly speaking, be necessary for someone to accompany mr. mcdonald to the
place where he stole the land rover, or from there to where it was ultimately left,
but given the relative distances, the presence of the acura and the other man
whom mr. mcdonald was associating with at the esso, both of whom were wearing
balaclavas, both of whom paid cash for their gas, at that hour of the night, i
infer that is how the theft was perpetrated.
i am satisfied that there are no other
reasonably available inferences and that the crown has proved beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. mcdonald was either a principal or a party to the
land rover’s theft.  as a consequence, the crown has proved that he knowingly
possessed property obtained by crime.
there is no evidence as to whether mr.
mcdonald’s face was masked during the theft of the land rover but it is
incontrovertible that his face was masked in the esso station at the time he
possessed the stolen land rover.  section 351(d) makes it an offence for a
person to have their face masked with the intention of committing an indictable
offence. i reject the inference that mr. mcdonald’s face was masked for some
innocent reason such as the temperature, given how little of his face was
visible in the warmth of the store at the time he waited to pay for gas. i am
satisfied, based on all of the evidence, that his intention in wearing a mask at
the gas station while in possession of the stolen land rover was to disguise
himself so as to prevent his identification as the person driving it that
night.  i find him guilty of each count.
dated:
march 4, 2025                                                      ___________________________
justice
peter scrutton
the colours are easier to identify in the
video footage than on the stills.
again, the colours and the pattern are
easier to identify in the video footage than on the stills.