ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. keung,
2025 oncj
145
date:  2025·03·12
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
anson
keung
sentencing
submissions heard:
january 14, 2025.
sentencing: march
12, 2025
mr. javier arvizu ....................................................................................   counsel
for the crown
mr. joseph giuliana .........................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
mr. keung was detained just after he stepped
out of a vehicle. a pat-down search revealed a loaded firearm concealed on his
person.
mr. keung was convicted at trial of carrying
a concealed firearm s 90(2), occupying a motor vehicle knowing a prohibited
weapon was present s 94(2) and possession of a loaded restricted firearm
without authorization s 95(2).
the crown submits that the threat posed by
loaded firearms requires a global sentence of 42 months less credit for
pre-trial custody and restrictions while on release for a global net sentence
of 36 months. the defence submits that a conditional sentence for the maximum
term would be sufficient given the accused’s subsequent good behaviour while on
bail.
aggravating circumstances
some of the circumstances that aggravate
sentence on certain counts are present as elements of the offence on other
counts (loaded firearm, concealed, carried and conveyed in public).
the circumstance that aggravates sentence on
all counts is the threat posed to public safety when a person decides to carry
a loaded handgun in a public place. that poses a risk to this community and significantly
undermines the community’s sense of safety and security.
mitigating circumstances
there are several mitigating circumstances:
•
mr. keung has no criminal record.
•
he is a youthful offender (20 at the time).
•
he was not the target of the investigation that
led to his arrest. he was not charged with being a party to any offence other
than possession of the handgun.
•
it’s been more than 3 years since his arrest. he
has obeyed the terms of his house arrest release and has not been charged with
any further offences.
•
he served 3 days in pre-trial custody
analysis
general deterrence, denunciation and
protection of the public are the primary objectives of sentencing for
possession of a concealed loaded restricted firearm in a public place. firearms
offences have become pervasive in york region and the greater toronto area.
they have had devastating and often fatal consequences. they undermine the
safety of everyone in the community.
the sentencing range for a first offender
convicted of possessing a loaded firearm in circumstances where there was no
other criminal activity falls at the low end of the penitentiary range –
r v
burke-whittaker,
2025 onca 142
at para
38
.
other objectives of sentencing are
important, especially when sentencing a first offender. the sentence must leave
room for rehabilitation. the principle of restraint applies. yet considering
the significant threat handguns pose to public safety these principles must play
a lesser role than they would for other offences.
mr. keung’s involvement in this offence
remains a mystery despite the background provided in the pre-sentence report.
he was cooperative with the probation officer, but he provided only brief
answers. his responses showed little insight into the gravity of the offence
although he was aware of the serious potential sentence that may result.
he left school after grade 11. he mentioned
working a few places, but his statements about employment are vague. it doesn’t
appear he’s had a steady job since leaving school. he uses marijuana regularly,
but there is no evidence of addiction to alcohol or drugs. there’s no evidence
of a major mental health disorder although he did receive some counselling in
relation to an incident where he was stabbed when he was younger. while his
association with negative peers led to his arrest, the probation officer found
no current evidence of gang affiliation.
he did not apply for any variation in the
house arrest condition on his bail for work or education. he attended some online
high school courses then abandoned them, but he seems to have started again. he
is content to spend most of his time playing video games. he is socially
isolated and doesn’t have a strong connection with his family.
we don’t know why mr. keung decided to carry
a loaded handgun. the purpose of the weapon is plain. the fact that he carried
the gun shows there is still a lot we don’t know about him. despite the passage
of time, there’s little evidence of positive steps taken towards rehabilitation
or building a new future. that’s not an aggravating circumstance, but it
distinguishes this case from others where the accused has worked hard at reform
prior to sentence.
the conditional sentence proposed by the
defence is not sufficient to meet the need for general deterrence and
denunciation for these offences.  it would do little to bring home the gravity
of the offence and promote a sense of responsibility in mr. keung.
the crown’s submission is within the range,
but for this offence and this offender i find a global sentence in the range of
36 months would be an appropriate starting point. i agree that in determining
the final sentence, 6 months should be deducted for the lengthy period of house
arrest. the resulting 30-month sentence would also take into account the 3 days
spent in pre-trial custody without a formal deduction from the final sentence.
i find a global sentence of 30 months is the
least restrictive sentence that would be proportionate to the gravity of the
offences and the degree of responsibility of mr. keung.
conclusion
mr. keung is sentenced to a jail term of 30
months on each count concurrent for a total global sentence to be served of 30
months.
the firearm and ammunition are ordered
forfeit to the crown for destruction – s 491.  the s 95 offence engages s 109
of the
criminal code
.
mr. keung will be prohibited from possessing
firearms or other weapons as set out in that section for a period of 10 years.
the ss 90, 94, 95 offences are secondary
designated offences for the purpose of dna registration when prosecuted by
indictment. considering the serious threat to public safety posed by someone
carrying a loaded handgun in public, the strong community interest in the
identification of persons involved with firearms offences and the limited
intrusion on mr. keung’s privacy given the limits on the data collected and
limits on access, i find it necessary to order that mr. keung provide a sample
of his dna for registration on the national databank.
delivered: march 12, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel