ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. lachance
, 2025 oncj 690
date:  2025 12 24
court file no.:  windsor
25-81102161, 25-81102531
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
luke lachance
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 4
november, 17 december, 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 24 december 2025
jonathan lall......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
brandon diesbourg.........................................................................
counsel for the offender
pratt j.:
on
4 november 2025 the offender luke lachance appeared before me for sentencing.
he had entered several guilty pleas before my brother justice mcgivern on 29
august.  no facts were provided on that day as the pleas were entered so that a
pre-sentence report (psr) could be ordered.  on the november date, sentencing
submissions were made by counsel.
the
parties provided a joint submission on sentence.  i advised them that i was
considering departing from that sentence.  i gave counsel an opportunity to
provide caselaw that supported the joint submission and to make further
argument.  that caselaw and argument were put before the court on 17 december.
these
are my reasons for sentence.
facts
the
offender pleaded guilty in relation to nine separate incidents, all from april
and may 2025.  briefly, they are as follows:
(1)
15
april, robbery of circle k at 7887 tecumseh road east at 120am.  the offender
entered and took several packs of cigarettes.  when confronted by the store
clerk, he pointed a knife at him and threatened harm if he didn’t open the cash
register and give him money.  he took $150 and a quantity of beer.
(2)
17
april, robbery of circle k at 2606 jefferson boulevard at 151am.  he approached
the clerk with a knife and a mask over his face and demanded money and
cigarettes.  he took $90.
(3)
25
april, robbery of circle k at 1675 tecumseh road east at 1250am.  he was armed
with a knife.  he told one of the two clerks not to move, and told the other to
open the cash register.  he took cash, then went to the back of the store and
took a 12-pack of beer.  the total value of the theft was approximately $250.
(4)
25
april, robbery of circle k at 991 ouellette avenue at 458am.  wearing a mask,
he entered the store and went behind the counter.  he threatened to stab the
clerk with a knife if he tried to intervene.  he took $50-60.
(5)
27
april, robbery of circle k at 1675 tecumseh road east at 1140am.  while clerks
were helping two customers, he went behind the counter and brandished a knife.
he demanded money and took $150-200.
(6)
4
may, robbery of circle k at 12270 tecumseh road east at 1138pm.  wearing a
mask, he brandished a knife to the clerk and took $40 and five packs of
cigarettes.
(7)
5
may, robbery of petro-canada at 3025 manning road at 2am.  wearing a mask, he
entered the store with a knife and went behind the counter.  he demanded money
and cigarettes, and left with $200 and a four-pack of beer.
(8)
7
may, robbery of circle k at 2695 lauzon road at 124am.  with his face masked,
he entered the store with a knife and went behind the counter.  he demanded the
clerk empty the cash register.  he took a quantity of cigarettes and an
unquantified amount of cash.
(9)
9
may, robbery of circle k at 2695 lauzon road at 1250am.  armed with a knife, he
entered the store and went behind the counter.  he demanded the clerk open the
store safe.  when the clerk said he couldn’t, the offender threw the safe timer
on the floor.  he took approximately $60 from the cash register and a six-pack
of beer.
all
incidents were caught on surveillance video.  to be clear, in all robberies the
offender was carrying a knife in his right hand and his face was covered.  he
was not wearing gloves.  police were able to recover a fingerprint from a pack
of cigarettes at one of the crime scenes that led them to the offender.
while
i have described all of the above incidents as robberies, it should be noted
that on incidents 2, 4, 6, and 9, the plea entered was to the offence of having
his face masked with an intent to commit an indictable offence.  in my view,
this does not change the underlying circumstances or the inherent seriousness
of the encounters.
the joint submission
counsel
jointly submitted that a sentence of two years jail, less one day, should be
imposed.  this would be followed by two years of probation and accompanied by
several ancillary orders.
i
expressed concern on the november date that the proposed sentence was not
appropriate given the number and seriousness of the offences.  i adjourned the
matter to give counsel the chance to provide additional support for the joint
submission.
the law
joint
submissions are a common feature of criminal courts.  they are negotiated
agreements between crown and defence as to sentence.  this ability to arrive at
such agreements, and the expectation that they will be acceded to by the
courts, encourages resolution.  given the enormous volume of cases heard in
criminal court, they are a most valuable tool.  they allow counsel, who know
the case better than the sentencing judge, to arrive at what they both believe
is a just outcome.  in turn, the judge is expected to go along with the
agreement.  this provides the predictability that allows the system to function
efficiently.
that
efficiency, however, does not come at all costs.  there will be times when a
joint submission is, in the court’s view, so unduly harsh or lenient that it
should not be followed.  while this should be the exception and not the rule,
judges retain the discretion to impose the sentence they believe to be fit,
regardless of counsels’ recommendation.
this
discretion is codified in s. 606(1.1)(b)(iii).  that subparagraph is part of
the broader plea inquiry that should be carried out before any guilty pleas are
entered.  the section states as follows:
(1.1) a court may
accept a plea of guilty only if it is satisfied that
(a) the
accused is making the plea voluntarily;
(b) the
accused understands
(i) that the plea
is an admission of the essential elements of the offence,
(ii)
the nature and consequences of the plea, and
(iii)
that the
court is not bound by any agreement made between the accused and the prosecutor
;
and
(c) the
facts support the charge.
(emphasis added)
in
the present case, before justice mcgivern, counsel for the offender was asked
if the plea inquiry was carried out.  his honour was told it had been.  that
satisfied justice mcgivern, and it satisfies me as well.  courts are entitled
to rely on the submissions of counsel in this regard.
a
court cannot set aside a joint submission simply because it would prefer a
different sentence.  deference is owed to counsel, who have often engaged in
significant discussion on details of the case that are unknown to the
sentencing judge.  even in cases where the proposed sentence seems out of step
with what would ordinarily be imposed, courts are expected to agree.
that
expectation was considered by the supreme court of canada in the case of
r.
v.
anthony-cook
2016 scc 43 (canlii)
,
s.c.j. no. 43
.  justice moldaver began that
decision with a more succinct summary of the principles i’ve noted above:
1   resolution
discussions between crown and defence counsel are not only commonplace in the
criminal justice system, they are essential. properly conducted, they permit
the system to function smoothly and efficiently.
2  joint
submissions on sentence -- that is, when crown and defence counsel agree to
recommend a particular sentence to the judge, in exchange for the accused
entering a plea of guilty -- are a subset of resolution discussions.1 they are
both an accepted and acceptable means of plea resolution. they occur every day
in courtrooms across this country and they are vital to the efficient operation
of the criminal justice system. as this court said
in r. v. nixon,
2011 scc 34
,
2 s.c.r. 566
, not only do joint submissions "help to resolve the
vast majority of criminal cases in canada", but "in doing so, [they]
contribute to a fair and efficient criminal justice system" (para. 47).
as
his honour then noted, however, joint submissions are not sacrosanct.  there
may be times when judges depart from them.  the
anthony-cook
decision
considered this situation.  in that case, a trial judge found a joint
submission to be unfit and declined to follow it.  in allowing the appeal, the
supreme court ruled that fitness was not the correct test to apply when
departing from a joint submission.  a more demanding test is required, given
the value of joint submissions to the parties and to the justice system.  at
paragraphs 32 - 34, justice moldaver stated:
32  under the
public interest test, a trial judge should not depart from a joint submission
on sentence unless the proposed sentence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute or is otherwise contrary to the public interest. but,
what does this threshold mean? two decisions from the newfoundland and labrador
court of appeal are helpful in this regard.
33  in druken, at
para. 29, the court held that a joint submission will bring the administration
of justice into disrepute or be contrary to the public interest if, despite the
public interest considerations that support imposing it, it is so "markedly
out of line with the expectations of reasonable persons aware of the
circumstances of the case that they would view it as a break down in the proper
functioning of the criminal justice system". and, as
stated by the same
court in r. v. b.o.2,
2010 nlca 19 (canlii)
, at para.
56
, when assessing a
joint submission, trial judges should "avoid rendering a decision that
causes an informed and reasonable public to lose confidence in the institution
of the courts".
34  in my view,
these powerful statements capture the essence of the public interest test
developed by the martin committee. they emphasize that a joint submission
should not be rejected lightly, a conclusion with which i agree. rejection
denotes a submission so unhinged from the circumstances of the offence and the
offender that its acceptance would lead reasonable and informed persons, aware
of all the relevant circumstances, including the importance of promoting
certainty in resolution discussions, to believe that the proper functioning of
the justice system had broken down. this is an undeniably high threshold -- and
for good reason, as i shall explain.
this
test continues to be applied when joint submissions are evaluated by sentencing
judges (see:
r.
v.
holtorf
2025 onsc 6068
;
r.
v.
velauther
2025 onsc 6877
).
i
would also note that the stringency of this test was questioned by justice
bychok of
the nunavut court of justice in the case of
r.
v.
aklok
2020 nucj 37
.  his honour found the “so unhinged” test to be too demanding, and
that it denied judges the discretion conferred on them by parliament.
referring to the idea that a joint submission should only be rejected if it
would lead to the conclusion that the proper functioning of the justice system
had broken down, his honour noted:
a judge's inability to impose a just and
principled sentence constitutes a breakdown in the justice system.
the
anthony-cook
test
has been affirmed by the court of appeal for ontario
in the cases of
r.
v.
fuller
2020 onca 115
where the court found
joint submissions should only be departed from in “rare cases” and “exceptional
circumstances”, and
r.
v.
harasiuk
2023 onca 594
, which
cited
both
anthony-cook
and
fuller
as proper statements of law.
it
is a curious corollary of
anthony-cook
and subsequent cases
that
sentencing courts are required to impose demonstrably unfit sentences if they
are packaged as joint submissions.  i find myself agreeing with justice bychok
in
aklok
that this mandatory acquiescence forces sentencing judges into
untenable positions and potentially conflicts with their oath to administer
justice fairly and impartially.
all
of that being said, any changes to the proper legal test must come either from
appellate courts or from parliament.  in the meantime, i am required to apply
the test set out in
anthony-cook
.  that is the test i must, and will,
implement.
the pre-sentence report
the
psr in this case provided useful background on the offender.  it shows aspects
of his life that are encouraging, and others that are less so.
the
offender has a good relationship with his mother tracy meloche.  she supports
him and is willing to have him under her roof so long as he remains committed
to sobriety and to addressing his mental health.  she said the offender was an
intelligent person whose employment prospects suffered because of his addiction
and mental illness.  ms. meloche did express some concern with the offender’s
current intimate relationship, describing it as “unhealthy”.
that
relationship is with amanda skrobacz.  she and the offender have been together
for fifteen years and share an eight-year-old daughter.  while ms. skrobacz
told the psr author she is not fearful of the offender, there has been conflict
in their relationship, and he was once charged with threatening her.
the
offender began experimenting with illicit drugs at 12 years old.  he first used
marijuana, and then at the age of 15 began using magic mushrooms, ecstasy,
cocaine, and ketamine.  by age 17, he was a regular cocaine user and was
selling the drug to support himself.  he was off drugs from ages 22 to 25, but
was then introduced to crystal methamphetamine by a friend.  when he learned
ms. skrobacz was pregnant with their daughter, he was sober for about two
years.  he subsequently relapsed with cocaine and alcohol, and then with
methamphetamine as well.  eventually, his use of cocaine diminished while his
use of methamphetamine increased.  this is from page 6 of the psr:
he stated he initially would sell the
substance to support his own use; however, when he stopped selling and ran out
of money, he resorted to robberies to acquire money to support his habit.
while
he has attended inpatient rehabilitation “three or four times” in the past, he
has been unable to maintain his sobriety.  the psr states that his most recent
time in custody has “opened his eyes” and caused him to re-commit to staying
off drugs.  he is on psychiatric medication and feels he is in a better
position to live a positive life.
regarding
that psychiatric medication, the offender was diagnosed with schizophrenia at
the age of 33.  while he has been prescribed medication to treat this
condition, his compliance has been intermittent.  he told the psr author he was
not taking his medication at the time of the offences.  rather, according to
his counsel, he was self-medicating with street drugs.
overall,
i find the psr to be mixed in its impact.  the offender has the support of his
mother and his partner.  he is committed to maintaining his sobriety and
appears compliant with his medication.  these factors augur well for his
future.
i
cannot ignore, however, the less encouraging aspects of the report.  his
addictions are of long standing.  they have not been defeated by efforts at
rehabilitation, but by the fact that the offender has been in custody since the
robberies.  likewise, outside the structure of a detention centre, he has been
inconsistent in taking his medication.  when his addiction and lack of medical
compliance coincided, multiple violent offences resulted.
it
was also suggested that the offender’s mental illness was a driving factor in
these offences.  i will address this issue shortly.  for now, i am left with
the psr passage quoted above.  the offender admitted to the author that he
committed robberies not because his illness compelled him, but to finance his
own drug addiction.
while
the psr offers some hope for the future, the offender’s own words and past
conduct temper that hope.
victim impact
i
received one victim impact statement in this case.  the victim robin singh
described ongoing fear and an impact on his employment as a result of the
robbery.
principles of sentencing
parliament
has directed sentencing judges on how to fashion appropriate sentences.  this
direction is found in the
criminal code
from
section 718
onward.
that
section states that “[t]he fundamental purpose of sentencing
is to protect
society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect
for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
imposing just sanctions”.  it then sets out objectives that should figure into
each sentence.  these objectives include denunciation, deterrence,
rehabilitation, and the promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders.
in
addition to these general principles, parliament has also enacted more specific
provisions applicable to certain cases, depending on their underlying facts.
section
718.04 states that where the victim of an offence is “vulnerable because of
personal circumstances”, a court should give primary consideration to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence.  i will have more to say about the
vulnerability of the victims in this case later in these reasons.
finally,
section 718.1 reminds courts that any sentence imposed should be proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
caselaw
as
part of their additional submissions, both counsel submitted caselaw in support
of the proposed sentence.
the
crown filed three cases.
the
case of
r.
v.
maroti
2010 mbca 54
dealt with the sentencing of an
offender who pleaded guilty to seven gas station robberies.  all took place
over a ten-day period, and all involved the brandishing of a knife.  one
location was robbed twice in a short period of time.  in one robbery the
offender threatened to stab the clerk if they did not open the cash register.
the offender committed the robberies to support his drug addiction.
the
sentencing judge imposed a three-year sentence.  the sentence was appealed on
the basis of the judge’s reasons being insufficient.  in his decision, the
judge simply relied on the concept of stare decisis and imposed sentence.  no
resort was had to the principles of sentencing and no explanation was given for
why that sentence fit those particular circumstances.
the
bulk of the decision related to concurrent vs consecutive sentences when
multiple offences are committed in a “spree” fashion.  without diving deeply
into this area of the law, i find a concurrent sentence on each count before me
would be appropriate.  the offences are sufficiently close in time that while i
do not make a finding that they were effectively one transaction, i do conclude
that the interest of justice can be served with concurrent sentences.  further,
were i to impose consecutive sentences, the principle of totality would require
a series of artificially and unreasonably short component sentences.  in the
result, the sentence i impose today will be concurrent across all counts and
informations.
before
leaving
maroti
, i note that while the sentence was upheld as fit despite
the insufficient reasons, justice steel found that had she been the trial
judge, she would have imposed a four-year sentence.  given the similarities
between maroti and the offender, this is a useful observation.
in
r.
v.
huang
2020 onca 341
, a 12-month sentence was upheld on
appeal (with an adjustment to reflect pre-sentence custody).  huang had robbed
two gas stations a total of three times, all with a knife and while wearing a
mask.  he had what the crown on appeal termed “serious mental health issues”
that warranted “a more merciful sentence” than might otherwise be appropriate.
the
crown also
relied on
r.
v.
ellis
2013 onca 739
, a case that
considered mental illness in the context of criminal sentencing.
the
offender provided
the case of
r.
v.
lea
2010 mbca 37
.  in that
case, the manitoba court of appeal upheld a conditional sentence of two years
less a day (minus a small adjustment) for two gas station robberies.  the
difficulty with this case is that the only description of the offences is as
follows, from paragraph 3 of the decision:
on july 25 and 26, 2007, in the city of
winnipeg, the respondent robbed two convenience stores while on a cocaine
binge.
there
is nothing in the decision about the use of a weapon or mask, or about how lea
interacted with the victims.  the sentence is therefore of limited use in the
present case.  what is clear is that the imposition of a conditional sentence
for multiple retail robberies is highly unusual and at odds with much of the
caselaw in this area.  i take counsel’s reliance on this case to show a wide
range of sentences are possible even on offences like these.
the
case of
r.
v.
knoblauch
2000 scc 58
also dealt with the
imposition of a conditional sentence on a mentally ill offender, but on facts
and offences vastly different from the case before me.
finally,
in the case of r. v.
cadienhead
2014 onsc 618
, justice spies imposed a
12-month conditional sentence for one count of robbery committed in the context
of a bogus meeting to sell electronics equipment.  cadienhead had no prior
record.
counsel
for the offender also provided a chapter from the book
mental disorder in
canadian criminal law
.  the passage cited in argument included the
suggestion at
page
6-37
that an offender’s mental illness can function as a mitigating factor “
where it played a
role in the commission of the offence but the accused has subsequently sought
and received psychiatric assistance.”
i’m
not convinced the cases provided support the joint submission.  maroti received
a three-year sentence for fewer robberies than the offender committed.  huang
received a 12-month sentence for just two robberies.  the
lea
decision
would appear, respectfully, to be an outlier in the realm of retail robbery
sentences.
the
materials are more helpful on the question of how the offender’s mental illness
should be considered.
in
his submissions, crown counsel suggested it “used to be” that a causal
connection between an offender’s mental illness and offending had to be shown,
but that the language had been softened
in the
ellis
decision.
respectfully, i don’t see any softening of that requirement.  this is paragraph
116 of
ellis
:
the authorities, some of which were
referred to by the trial judge, indicate that it is not enough to determine
that the offender had a mental illness at the time of the offence. the trial
judge must also determine the extent to which that illness contributed to the
conduct in question and the impact of that finding on the appropriate sentence.
the trial judge will consider whether there a causal connection between the
offender's mental illness and the commission of the offence and, if so, whether
it diminished the offender's culpability.
(emphasis added)
in
r.
v.
batisse
2009 onca 114
,
cited in
ellis
, justice
gillese said this at paragraph 38:
furthermore, unlike hill, where mental
illness was not a factor,
here the appellant's mental health problems played
a central role in the commission of the offence
. in such circumstances,
deterrence and punishment assume less importance. as this court emphasized
in
r. v. robinson,
1974 canlii 1491 (on ca)
,
o.j. no. 545
,
19 c.c.c. (2d) 193 (c.a.)
, at p. 197
c.c.c.,
where offenders commit offences while they are out of touch with
reality due to mental illness, specific deterrence is meaningless to them
.
further, general deterrence is unlikely to be achieved either since people with
mental illnesses that contribute to the commission of a crime will not usually
be deterred by the punishment of others. as well, severe punishment is less
appropriate in cases of persons with mental illnesses since it would be
disproportionate to the degree of responsibility of the offender. in such
circumstances, the primary concern in sentencing shifts from deterrence to
treatment as that is the best means of ensuring the protection of the public
and that the offending conduct is not repeated. this is especially so where a
lengthy prison term may be regarded as counterproductive:
see, also, r. v.
hiltermann,
1993 canlii 16387 (ab ca)
,
a.j. no. 609
,
141 a.r. 223 (c.a.)
, and r. v. peters,
2000 nfca 55 (canlii)
,
n.j. no. 287
,
194 nfld. & p.e.i.r. 184 (c.a.)
, at paras.
18-19
.
(emphasis added)
the
need for a causal connection was recently affirmed by the court of appeal for
ontario
in the case of
r.
v.
lojovic
2025 onca 319
, where the
court
cited both
ellis
and
batisse
as correct statements of law.
what
evidence is there, then, of a causal connection between the offender’s mental
illness and his offences?
in
my respectful view, the answer is very little.
based
on the facts as read in and accepted, these robberies were not carried out by
someone in the throes of mental illness who had lost touch with reality.  this
is not a case of a person randomly attacking others because of hallucinations
or delusions only they can perceive.  on nine separate occasions, the offender
armed himself with a knife, put on a mask, and entered a convenience store.  he
threatened harm, sometimes verbally and sometimes through brandishing the
knife, to the clerks if they did not comply with his demand for money and
cigarettes.  i heard no evidence that the offender was at all incoherent or
seemingly divorced from reality during these times.  on multiple occasions he
also helped himself to beer before leaving.  in the psr he admitted he
committed robberies to finance his drug habit.  in short, i see almost no
connection between the offender’s mental health diagnosis and his offending.
it could be argued that his illness led him to self-medicate, which led to a
need to buy street drugs, which led to him committing the robberies.  but that
chain ignores the conscious, intentional decisions made along the way: he’d
been medicated for his illness but chose not to take what was prescribed.
instead, he chose illicit drugs.  he committed offences to pay for the path he
chose to take.
i
have every sympathy for people suffering from mental illness, including the
offender.  i sincerely hope he is successful in addressing his illness and his
addiction.  but saying his sentence should be reduced because of his mental
health is, respectfully, to ignore the facts of this case.
aggravating
and mitigating factors
an
aggravating factor in this case is the number of robberies committed.  multiple
circle k stores were targeted along with one petro-canada station.  on each
occasion, the offender confronted no more than two clerks.  convenience store
clerks are vulnerable victims who deserve protection (
see:
r.
v.
macri
2012 skpc 94
,
r.
v.
gokool-clark
2024 onsc 5927
).
in
the case of
r.
v.
foster
2023 onsc 5066
, justice goldstein
sentenced an offender for three convenience store robberies.  his honour
imposed an eight-year sentence, though in that case the robberies were violent
and led to injury to all clerk victims.  regarding the vulnerability of store
clerks, his honour said this at paragraph 22:
convenience store clerks often work alone
late at night. they are vulnerable and isolated. robberies of convenience
stores shake the safety and security of the community. everyone must
occasionally resort to these stores. in addition to the danger to the store
clerks, average citizens are also exposed to danger when these stores are
robbed.
in
the present case, eight of the nine robberies were committed late at night.
the one that wasn’t was committed when other customers were in the store,
further endangering innocent citizens.
the
offender also has a criminal record that includes four offences of violence:
assault, two convictions for assault causing bodily harm, and uttering
threats.  i agree with counsel that there are gaps in his record that show he
is capable of being a law-abiding member of society.  i must remember, however,
that the present offences are not the first time he has been convicted of
violence.
further,
while i do not consider his mental illness to be an aggravating factor, i do
consider his decision not to medicate that illness appropriately.  that
decision led to criminality in the form of several violent offences.  parliament
has directed sentencing judges to impose sentences that protect society.  that
requires an assessment of the level of risk offenders pose.  in the present
case, the offender has shown that he presents a significant risk to public
safety when he makes the choice to self-medicate.
in
mitigation i have the important factor of the offender’s guilty pleas.  he has
taken responsibility for his actions.  i accept his remorse as sincere.  in
submissions in support of the jointly recommended sentence, crown counsel stated
that by resolving these cases, the offender saved the court system a trial of
at least a week’s duration.  by doing so he allowed other cases to be tried
instead.  i agree that by resolving these matters the offender has freed up
resources in the justice system.  since the pandemic, prosecutors have been
actively engaged in triaging criminal cases to ensure the most serious matters
can be heard on their merits.  as a consequence, many cases have been resolved
for sentences that might otherwise not have been considered.  this is a
necessary step as the system deals with its ongoing backlog.
surely,
though, this is one of the cases that deserves whatever resources it needs.
minor (and sometimes not so minor) thefts and assaults are resolved to free up
time to hear serious cases like this one.  while the offender has saved trial
time by entering guilty pleas, we must be careful not to overstate the
importance of those savings in serious cases.  the crown runs the risk of
appearing to resolve cases for expediency if we do.
the
offender’s family support is also mitigating in the sense that it reduces his
likelihood of reoffending.  his mother and partner are willing to help him if
he is willing to take that help.  he has two places he can stay on release from
custody.  coupled with his new willingness to take his medication and deal with
his addiction, he is well-positioned for success.
analysis
i
have reviewed the caselaw provided, together with other authorities that came
from my own research.  i have assessed the aggravating and mitigating factors
and considered the individual circumstances of this offender and these
offences.
the
joint submission is for a jail sentence of two years less a day minus credit
for pre-sentence custody.  i may only depart from that joint submission if i
find it is contrary to the public interest and would lead a reasonable,
well-informed person to conclude the functioning of the justice system had
broken down.
after
much consideration, i find the joint submission is unacceptable.  it is
contrary to the public interest.  a reformatory sentence would be wholly
inadequate for this offender and these offences.  it would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.  i do not ignore the rehabilitative
efforts and intentions of the offender, but i must emphasize public safety,
denunciation, and deterrence.  the offender victimized innocent citizens
repeatedly, with a weapon and with his face covered.  on nine separate occasions,
he made the decision to enter these stores and take what he wanted under threat
of violence.  he exploited the vulnerability of the clerks and posed a
significant risk to the public.  his crimes only stopped when police caught up
to him, thanks to a fingerprint he’d left behind at one of the stores.
i
have considered whether to give the offender the chance to withdraw his guilty
plea.  i will not.  prior to his plea being entered, his counsel was asked if
the plea inquiry had been completed.  counsel said it had.  there is no
evidence to suggest the offender was under any misapprehension as to the
court’s discretion to depart from whatever sentence recommendations counsel may
make.  there are no grounds to permit the offender to withdraw his plea.
the
sentence i impose today must reflect the seriousness of the offences, but it
must also balance that concern with the need for rehabilitation.  the gaps in
the offender’s record show, as i said, his ability to be a law-abiding
citizen.  he has the tools he needs to succeed in the future.
the
offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
he
will be imprisoned for a period of four years minus credit for pre-sentence
custody.  that credit will reflect 227 actual days enhanced to 341 days.  this
leaves a further 1,119 days to be served, concurrent on each count.
(2)
he
will provide a sample of his dna to the windsor police service for inclusion in
the national dna databank, on or before 31 january 2026.  this order will apply
only to each count of robbery.
(3)
there
will be a weapons prohibition under
s. 109
of the
criminal code
on each robbery
count, for life.
victim
surcharges on each count will be waived.
i
genuinely hope the offender is sincere in his desire to overcome his addiction
and his mental illness.  let this be the end of a dark chapter, and the start
of a new, bright chapter.
released:
24 december 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt