ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. forde
, 2025 oncj 201
date:
2025 02 28
court
file no.:  toronto
24-48108627
between:
his majesty
the king
— and —
asa forde
ruling on
mills
application
stage 1
criminal code
sections 278.93 – 278.95
before
justice brock jones
heard
on january 24 and february 25, 2025
written
reasons for judgment released on february 28, 2025
approved for publication:
criminal code
section
278.9(1)(c)
m. tchivtchibachieva........................................................................ counsel
for the crown
d. embry and
p. socka........................................................................ counsel
for a. forde
a. dresser….…………………………………………………………...........counsel
for s.n.
jones j.:
introduction
asa forde is charged with one count of sexual
assault. on his behalf, mr. embry brought an application to produce third-party
records held by covenant house.
the application sought the production of “all documentation in
possession of covenant house related to an incident that took place [between
the parties] on february 29, 2024, and, in particular, any incident report
relating to those parties on that date.”
ms. dresser, on behalf of s.n., opposed the application. the crown made
no submissions but adopted the position taken by ms. dresser.
for the following reasons, i found that the application failed to pass
the stage 1 “likely relevance” test and was therefore dismissed.
factual
background
the alleged offence
the applicant was a resident of covenant
house in early 2024. ms. s.n. was familiar with him. she did not reside at
covenant house but availed herself of the organization’s services regularly.
on february 29, 2024, while at covenant house,
ms. s.n. alleges that she kissed the applicant in a stairwell. while this was
on consent, what happened next was not. the applicant touched her body in
various areas and placed her hands on parts of his body. the details are not
necessary to review for the purposes of this judgment.
on march 5, 2024, ms. s.n. gave a videotaped
statement to investigating officers from the toronto police service about the
alleged sexual assault. she informed the officers that she told a few friends
and staff at covenant house about the incident before speaking to them.
the records of covenant house
no affidavit or other evidence was provided by the applicant respecting any
features of covenant house. i am prepared, however, to take judicial notice of
the following. some of this information i have obtained from covenant house
toronto’s website.
covenant
house toronto is a nonprofit organization that serves at-risk, homeless and
trafficked young persons and young adults between the ages of 16 and 24. the
toronto location serves as many as 300 persons daily. covenant house also
offers services such as education, after-care, counselling, health care,
employment assistance, and job training.
young
adults who rely upon covenant house for support are typically vulnerable and in
need of care and protection.
no
affidavit was provided as part of the application materials to establish that
an “incident report” was created due to ms. s.n. speaking to staff at covenant
house about the assault. it seems this fact was assumed.
however, ms. dresser did not dispute that something of that nature likely
existed. a subpoena was served on covenant house, and some documents were
provided to the court under seal in response to it. i did not review those
documents for the stage 1 hearing.
position of the parties and the complainant
mr.
embry and mr. socka submit that the third-party records should be produced and
disclosed as they are “likely relevant” to issues at trial. specifically, the
credibility of the complainant. the records are necessary to make full answer
and defence. they are not being sought for any improper purpose. on balance,
whatever privacy rights ms. s.n. may have in the records, those are outweighed
by the applicant’s entitlement to any relevant information necessary to defend
himself.
if
an incident report existed, it would contain a statement by the complainant
about what she alleged occurred. it would constitute her first formal statement
and could provide important information for possible impeachment purposes at
the applicant’s trial.
ms.
dresser submits on behalf of ms. s.n. that the application should be dismissed
as the applicant has not provided a sufficient evidentiary basis to establish
that the records are “likely relevant” to an issue at trial. this application
is best characterized as a fishing expedition.
she
notes that unlike the disclosure of crown evidence, there is no assumption of
relevancy in respect of documents sought in a section 278 application. the mere
fact that some records exist and are in covenant house’s possession does not
establish “likely relevance.” far from it. the
criminal code
is explicit
that more is needed.
in
the absence of evidence that the records have potential impeachment value,
there is no basis to continue with the application. ms. dresser pointed me to
several reported decisions which stand for the proposition that a prior
statement by the complainant about the subject matter of the offence is not, by
itself, a basis to conclude that they have probative value.
ms.
dresser further submits that the applicant must establish that the records have
some added information not otherwise available to him through the disclosure
materials provided by the crown. she takes the position he has failed to do so.
law and analysis
sections
278.1
to
278.9
of the
criminal code
create the applicable regime for the
disclosure of third-party records where an accused is charged with sexual
assault. there is no dispute that the documents in question are “records” as
defined by section 278.1 and that the complainant has a privacy interest in
them.
at
the first stage of the application, the onus is on the applicant to demonstrate
that the sought-after records are “likely relevant to an issue at trial” and
that “production of the records is necessary for the interest of justice”: see
criminal
code
sections 278.4 and
278.5
.
this
threshold requirement ensures that the court, in its gatekeeper function, focuses
the trial on the necessary issues to be tried. in
r. v. mcneil,
2009 scc
3
, the supreme court explained the significance of this threshold burden and
the difference between the first-party disclosure obligations of the crown and
information contained in third-party records at para. 28:
this threshold burden simply
reflects the fact that the context in which third party records are sought is
different from the context of first party disclosure.  we have already seen
that the presumptive duty on crown counsel to disclose the fruits of the
investigation in their possession under stinchcombe is premised on the
assumptions that the information is relevant and that it will likely comprise
the case against the accused.  no such assumptions can be made in respect of
documents in the hands of a third party who is a stranger to the litigation.
in
r. v. mills,
1999 canlii 637
, the supreme court of canada held that the
standard of “likely relevance” is determined by whether there is a “reasonable
possibility that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial or
the competence of a witness to testify”: see para. 124. records that contain a
prior statement of the complainant about the allegations before the court do
not necessarily pass this test. rather, as held by the ontario court of appeal
in
r. v. batte,
2000 canlii 5751
, there must be “some basis for
concluding that the statements have some potential to provide the accused with
some added information not already available to the defence or have some
potential impeachment value”: see para. 72.
section
278.3(4)
of the
criminal code
sets out a series of assertions by the
applicant which are insufficient on their own to establish “likely relevance.”
i have emphasized, in bold, those subsections of particular importance to this
application.
(4)
any
one or more of the following assertions by the accused are not sufficient on
their own to establish that the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial
or to the competence of a witness to testify:
(a)
that
the record exists;
(b)
that
the record relates to medical or psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling
that the complainant or witness has received or is receiving;
(c)
that
the record relates to the incident that is the subject-matter of the
proceedings
;
(d)
that
the record may disclose a prior inconsistent statement of the complainant or
witness;
(e)
that
the record may relate to the credibility of the complainant or witness
;
(f)
that
the record may relate to the reliability of the testimony of the complainant or
witness merely because the complainant or witness has received or is receiving
psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling;
(g)
that
the record may reveal allegations of sexual abuse of the complainant by a
person other than the accused;
(h)
that
the record relates to the sexual activity of the complainant with any person,
including the accused;
(i)
that
the record relates to the presence or absence of a recent complaint;
(j)
that
the record relates to the complainant’s sexual reputation; or
(k)
that
the record was made close in time to a complaint or to the activity that forms
the subject-matter of the charge against the accused.
the
applicant must satisfy the court that there is a “sufficient, case specific
evidentiary or informational foundation” to meet the likely relevance test: see
r v k.c.,
2021 onca 401
, at para.
31
.
importantly,
the “mere fact that a witness has said something in the past about a subject
matter on which the witness may be properly cross-examined at trial does not
award that prior statement any relevance”: see
r. v. l.g.,
o.j. no.
4974 (s.c.j.), at para. 18
.
furthermore,
the existing authorities have been clear that even if the records sought
include a report by the complainant that constitutes “first disclosure” of the
incident, that is insufficient, without more, to pass the likely relevance test.
in
r. v. duncan,
o.j. no. 5986
, the accused was charged with
sexual assault. the accused sought production of “all records of any statements
made by the complainant to a child youth worker ("cyw")” at the
complainant’s school. the records included the first statement made by the
complainant about the incident.
justice
renwick dismissed the application, noting that “the fact that the school cyw
received the first disclosure of any impropriety is an insufficient basis to
require production of the school records”: see para. 13. a police investigation
commenced after this initial disclosure to the cyw, and there was no evidence
in the application record to establish that anything relevant would be found
within the sought-after records. it was “purely speculative” that the
“first-disclosure records” would provide information not otherwise available to
the applicant.
in
r. v. d.d
.
o.j. no. 2781 (o.c.j.)
, the accused was charged with
sexual assault for an incident that occurred where both he and the complainant
were employed. the complainant came forward with her allegations months after
the incident. she first disclosed to her psychologist what happened. after
that, she disclosed what happened to other persons and organizations, and
provided a statement to the toronto police service.
the
accused brought an application to access the complainant’s counselling records
with her psychologist. justice libman denied the application, noting that even
if the counselling records contained the complainant’s first statements about
the incident underlying the charge, that does not establish “likely relevance”:
see para. 15. it only establishes a timeline for the statements subsequently
made by the complainant to the police. the applicant needed to point to
something more than the fact that the complainant made a statement about the
same event and that the statement “could” be the subject of cross-examination
at trial.
similarly,
this application fails to pass the threshold requirement of “likely relevance.”
taken at its highest, the applicant has established that the records exist and they
probably include a statement from the complainant about the incident before she
provided a statement to the police. even if this is the “first disclosure” of
what she alleges happened, that is insufficient.
by
contrast, where applications of this nature have passed the threshold test at
stage 1, evidence was presented that following the complainant’s “first disclosure”,
something different appeared in a subsequent police statement. for example, if
no allegations were made against the accused in an initial statement, but then
he was later accused of misconduct by the complainant, that would be a basis
for production. another example is where the applicant can demonstrate there
were some expected material inconsistencies between the complainant’s different
statements. ms. dresser provided me with the cases of
r. v. silvester,
o.j. no. 4779 (s.c.j.), at paras. 28-40
; and
r. v. r.n.,
o.j. no.
2517, at paras. 3 and 21
.
there
is no evidence before to conclude that the records sought in this case would
provide the accused with “added information not already available to the
defence” or that otherwise have some “potential impeachment value.”
it
is important to remember that the test for producing third-party records is
higher than the test for disclosure under
stinchcombe
. this is because
the records are not part of the crown’s case. as explained d. brown and justice
witkin, the authors of
prosecuting and defending sexual assault cases,
third
edition (emond publishing: toronto, 2024):
it is not enough that the record may be useful to the defence
or that it might assist in the cross-examination of a victim or witness
;
rather, there must be a reasonable possibility that the information is
logically probative to an issue at trial the competence of the witness to
testify. further, likely relevance must be demonstrated through evidence,
not
speculation
, and the accused must demonstrate that the records have the
potential to provide the accused with some added information not already
available to them or have some impeachment value.
conclusion
the
application is based on speculation that the records would provide information
otherwise unavailable to the defence simply because they probably contain the
complainant’s first statement about the alleged assault. the application is
dismissed at stage 1.
released:  february 28, 2025
signed: justice brock jones
https://covenanthousetoronto.ca/
. covenant house was
represented by counsel but they declined to participate in the hearing despite being
notified of the february 25, 2025 hearing.
the application materials include a
statement that “[i]t is believed that this investigation included an interview
with the complainant.” the source of this belief was never formally clarified,
but i accept it was a good-faith submission by counsel for the applicant.
page 340.
my emphasis added.