citation:
r. v. glasman
, 2025 oncj 397
date:
2025.07.25
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
gregory glasman
before justice fergus odonnell
reasons for judgment-conviction entered
on 3 july, 2025
jason chaaya....................................................................................................
for the crown
robert wulkan........................................................
for the defendant, gregory glasman
fergus odonnell j.:
overview
gregory glasman is charged with a
single count of operating a conveyance with an excess blood-alcohol level
on 21 july, 2024.
the background facts are
simple.  the ontario provincial police (opp) received a call
informing them that a vehicle had been stopped for thirty minutes at a
rural crossroads and that the driver appeared to be asleep.  when opp
constable lyon arrived about twenty minutes later, he and another officer
found a vehicle consistent with that description (right down to the plate
number) stopped at that intersection.  mr. glasman was in the
driver's seat, the only occupant of the truck, with the keys in the
ignition and the engine running.  the in-car video evidence showed that it
took almost a minute for the officers to rouse him.  there was a
smell of alcohol from his breath and he seemed disoriented, kind of dazed
and confused.  he initially opened the wrong window for the officers
and had some trouble finding his door handle.  he had to ask the
officers where he was and why he was there.  he had no trouble
walking and was able to follow instructions once outside the
vehicle.
seven minutes after arriving,
constable lyon read mr. glasman the "approved screening
device" (“asd”) demand.  mr. glasman managed that process with
no difficulty, but failed the asd and was placed under arrest--because he
was "impaired", to use constable lyon’s language.
constable lyon read mr. glasman his rights to counsel in the full,
traditional format including access to duty counsel and mr. glasman said
he did not want to call a lawyer at that point.
constable lyon transported mr. glasman
to the opp detachment.  mr. glasman did not ask for counsel at this
time but did ask a few times where he was.  at the detachment,
constable lyon read mr. glasman the right to counsel again.
constable lyon told the breath technician, opp sergeant mask, his grounds
for arrest and mr. glasman was handed over to sergeant mask.  in the
breath room, sergeant mask read mr. glasman his rights to counsel again
and at that point, mr. glasman expressed an interest in speaking with duty
counsel.  for reasons that are incomprehensible to me, sergeant mask said
to mr. glasman that he would have to provide the breath samples, whether
he spoke with a lawyer or not.  however, within a minute of mr. glasman’s
request to speak with a lawyer, sergeant mask called out for constable
lyon to call duty counsel, which was done right away.   he spoke with duty
counsel for about ten minutes.  mr. glasman subsequently provided samples
that resulted in readings of 160 and 150 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood.
as a result of those results, mr. glasman was charged with "operation over
80 mg of alcohol".
the interaction between mr. glasman
and sergeant mask was recorded and the video was played during the trial.
the witnesses
the three witnesses i heard from
were constable lyon, sergeant mask and mr. glasman.  i make the
following general observations about their evidence.
first, constable lyon was a very,
very green police officer.  indeed, he had been a police officer for
at most a few months at the time of mr. glasman's arrest. this trial was
the first time he had ever testified.  he had, however, that most
attractive characteristic a police officer or any other witness could
have:  a complete absence of guile or artifice or agenda, or, put
otherwise, evidence that left no doubt about its honesty and the absence
of any inclination to evasiveness or cleverness or cuteness or
combativeness in his answers.  those characteristics reflect well
upon him and will serve him well in the future.  would that that were so
of all witnesses.
sergeant mask was a far, far more
experienced officer and witness than constable lyon.  it was contended on
mr. glasman’s behalf that i should be dismissive of sergeant mask’s
testimony because he was “often evasive”.  i think that “evasive” is too
strong a word, although i understand the exchanges mr. wulkan was
referring to.  i would concede that other officers faced with mr. wulkan’s
questions (for example about how sergeant mask interpreted words or
gestures from mr. glasman) might have given different answers or might
have been more willing to engage in interpretation of those behaviours.
to do so would be consistent with applying one’s life experience to one’s
interactions with others, which can be fair game.  at the same time, another
witness might perfectly fairly perceive such questions as being an
invitation to speculation and, having seen my share of evasive witnesses,
i cannot say that sergeant mask’s intent or impact clearly fell into that
category.  for the large part, his answers effectively read as, “i can’t
read mr. glasman’s mind” and the fact that other witnesses might have been
comfortable interpreting mr. glasman’s reactions in the manner requested
by mr. wulkan is neither here nor there.  based on my experience the worst
that can be said about sergeant mask’s evidence was that he came across as
a bit rigid on some occasions.  excess rigidity can be a precursor or
companion characteristic to evasion, but not necessarily so.  i was
generally satisfied with sergeant mask’s evidence.
it was suggested that sergeant mask
was intimidating, both in court and in the breath room video.  this came
out both in mr. glasman’s testimony and in mr. wulkan’s submissions.  it
gave rise to perhaps the most trenchant observation made during the trial,
by mr. chaaya, when he wondered if we were all seeing the same video.  the
very same question had already occurred to me, in relation both to
sergeant mask’s presentation in the breath room and in the courtroom.  the
defence characterization of sergeant mask as intimidating or overbearing
or evasive is not made out by what i saw in either setting.
mr. glasman came across in both
settings—the breath room and the courtroom—as generally quiet and
mild-mannered.  it was the officers’ evidence that he was cooperative
throughout and constable lyon noted that mr. glasman was expressing
remorse from the get-go.  as with all witnesses in this or any trial, in
assessing their evidence i have to make determinations of both credibility
and reliability. to the outsider those might seem like pure synonyms, but
the former refers to a witness’s honesty or a witness’s wilful desire to
deceive whereas the latter asks if circumstances including ability to
observe, memory, etc. are such that the witness’s evidence, even an honest
witness’s evidence, can safely be relied upon.  in the present case, i have
no reason to question mr. glasman’s honesty, but i have serious reasons to
question his reliability, largely because what he describes does not match
what is on the breath room video or how sergeant mask presented in court.
i do not make that determination lightly and i fully understand that there
is an imbalance of power when a citizen deals with the police and that
courtrooms are stressful places, but there is nothing in sergeant mask’s
behaviour in either the courtroom or breath room that could objectively be
read as intimidating, even if mr. glasman has come to believe that to be
true.  with one brief, but avoidable, exception, which i address below,
sergeant mask behaved flawlessly throughout his interaction with mr.
glasman.  otherwise, i do not perceive anything in sergeant mask’s words,
tone, body language, general demeanour or behaviour that could satisfy the
descriptors mr. glasman used, which included “agitated” and
“intimidating”.  mr. glasman’s assertion, for example, that sergeant mask
became intimidating when mr. glasman changed his mind and asked for
counsel makes no sense when one considers that within seconds, perhaps a
minute of that request and sergeant mask’s question about what happened to
change mr. glasman’s mind about counsel, sergeant mask was calling out to
constable lyon to make the call to duty counsel.  if this was an attempt
at intimidation, it was very poorly executed.  i also note that mr.
glasman testified that sergeant mask’s demeanour changed when he asked to
speak with counsel; any such change of demeanour is entirely absent from
the breath room video.
the issues
the argument in this trial focused
on the following issues:
did constable lyon’s failure to
identify the “approved screening device” by specific model number
undermine his and the court’s ability to rely on the approved screening
device test result as providing grounds for mr. glasman’s arrest?
was mr. glasman’s arrest unlawful
because he was arrested for impaired driving rather than for excess blood
alcohol?
did sergeant mask interfere with
mr. glasman’s right to consult with counsel by telling him on more than
one occasion that he would still have to provide intoxilyzer samples,
whether he spoke with counsel or not?
if any of these alleged
constitutional shortcomings is made out, what is the appropriate remedy
under s. 24(2) of the
charter
?
the “approved screening device”
constable lyon testified about the
serial number of the device he used to take a reading of mr. glasman's
breath at the rural intersection, but not the precise model.  he did
say it was a draeger.  when challenged in cross-examination as to how
he could be certain it was an approved instrument if he did not know the
model number, he replied that he was confident that it was an approved
instrument because it is the device used by officers across the province
and it was provided to him by his police service.  mr. wulkan argues
that on the evidence before me i cannot be satisfied that the device used
by constable lyon was in fact an approved screening device, which means
that i cannot rely on the "fail" outcome as grounds for mr.
glasman's arrest, which means that he was arrested and detained and
required to provide samples of his breath without the requisite grounds
for detention and search, all in violation of sections 8 and 9 of the
charter
.
i disagree.  more importantly, the
highest court in the province disagrees and has done for over thirty years.
the court of appeal for ontario addressed this issue in
r. v. gundy,
2008
onca 284
, in the course of which rosenberg j.a. stated for the court:
in my view, cases holding that the officer did
not have reasonable and probable grounds because, although the officer referred
to the
device
as an
approved
screening
device
, he or she used a shorthand reference to the
device
or transposed some of the
numbers
or letters are wrongly decided.
in
the absence of some credible evidence to the contrary, it is not reasonable to
infer that an officer who says that he or she used an
approved
screening
device
actually
used an unapproved
device
.  that was the
holding of this court in
r. v. kosa
(1992),
42 m.v.r. (2d) 290
at 291
:
we are of the view that the manufacturer's
model
number
given by the officer in
evidence as model ja3 rather than model j3a as set forth in the
regulations was no more than an innocent transposition of a
number
and letter and that the unchallenged
assertion by the officer that it was an
approved
screening
device
is
sufficient proof thereof. if such is the case, there is no need to look further
to justify the finding of reasonable and probable grounds.
[emphasis added.]
and lest there be any residual doubt
from the foregoing, in its closing summary
in
gundy
of how the admission
of evidence that is the object of a
charter
argument should be analyzed
at trial, the court proceeded to note:
to summarize, on a charge of “over 80” or impaired driving,
where an issue arises as to the admissibility of the results of the
intoxilizer/breathalyzer analysis, the trial court should proceed as follows:
generally
…..
6.         in the
absence of credible evidence to the contrary, the officer’s testimony that he
or she made a demand with an
approved
screening
device
is
sufficient evidence that the officer had the requisite reasonable belief.
the officer is not required to give the particular model
number
or otherwise identify the
device
.  obvious errors such as incomplete reference
to the model
number
do not undermine the
officer’s testimony that the
device
was
an
approved
screening
device
.
there is no credible basis on the
record before me upon which to conclude that constable lyon was wrong in
his assertion that he had used an “approved screening device” to sample
mr. glasman’s breath at the roadside.  it was suggested to me that because
constable glasman had been cross-examined on the issue in this case, that
gundy
does not govern.  that might be a good argument if the
cross-examination had produced “credible evidence” (to use the language of
gundy
) creating doubt about constable lyon’s assertion, but that
did not happen here.
accordingly
, mr. glasman’s “fail” result on
the approved screening device gave constable lyon reasonable grounds to
arrest him.
arrested for the wrong offence?
the next issue chronologically is
that constable lyon testified that he arrested mr. glasman for impaired
driving, not for driving with excess blood alcohol.  this, mr. wulkan
argues, means that mr. glasman was wrongfully arrested in violation of his
charter
rights.  in support of this mr. wulkan relies on his
cross-examination of constable lyon with respect to the issue of whether
he did or did not have grounds to arrest mr. glasman for impaired driving.
that cross-examination ranged from constable lyon’s own understanding of
the grounds for arrest for each offence to whether or not some defendants
get charged with one of the two offences without getting charged with the
other, something that constable lyon agreed occurs with some regularity.
constable lyon agreed that he had
not had sufficient grounds to charge mr. glasman with impaired operation
in light of the objective facts known to him as a result of his attendance
on the scene.  if he had had those grounds, he would have gone directly to
an arrest for impaired operation and foregone the approved screening
device process.  this line of questioning concluded with mr. wulkan
suggesting to constable lyon that if he had had grounds for impaired
driving, he would have charged that offence, with constable lyon agreeing
that was correct.
the evidence, however, must be
assessed in its entirety, not based on one answer to a particular question.
what is not clear in mr. wulkan’s question is what time frame he is asking
about, i.e. before the approved screening device result, after the result,
at the police station with the benefit of reflection or whenever.
however, the entire context of all of the questions leading up to that
final question was the process leading up to the decision to administer
the approved screening device and there is no indication in this last
question that mr. wulkan’s time-focus had changed or that constable lyon
understood it to have changed.  i cannot and do not, therefore, take
constable lyon’s answer as accepting that he had no reasonable grounds to
arrest mr. glasman for impaired driving after he had the fail result on
the approved screening device.  this is particularly so when i consider
constable lyon’s very clear rejection of mr. wulkan’s suggestion to him that
a person failing the approved screening device does not mean the person is
impaired.  constable lyon was very clear that he considers a person who
has failed the approved screening device to be impaired, a conclusion that
was entirely reasonable.  that means that as soon as he had the asd
result, in constable lyon’s evidence, that was itself proof of impairment
by alcohol, which in turn would mean that he subjectively believed he had
grounds for arrest for impaired operation.
accordingly, i am satisfied that
when constable lyon arrested mr. glasman for impaired operation, he did in
totality have grounds to conclude that mr. glasman was impaired by alcohol
given the condition he was in, asleep in his truck in a live lane of
traffic, difficult to rouse, opening the wrong window, having trouble
opening the car door, uncertain where he was and having provided a
screening sample over the legal limit.  the fact that mr. glasman was not staggering
about once he got out of his truck is neither here nor there; impairment
in the context of motor vehicle operation is not the province of the
staggering, falling-down slobbering, incoherent drunkards that one might
see in some movies.  that may be one presentation, but a person can be
entirely unfit to drive due to impairment without any of those gross
manifestations because impairment is defined by much more subtle shortcomings
in ability to perceive, judge and react in a timely fashion, all of which
are affected by alcohol consumption.  looked at in the reasonable grounds
context constable lyon was governed by in his decision to arrest, it is
not open to rational dispute that once he knew the minimum level of
alcohol in mr. glasman’s blood from the asd result, which he said was over
80,
that information, even standing alone, provides reasonable grounds for
belief that mr. glasman was impaired by alcohol.
accordingly, i am satisfied that
the evidence establishes that, at the time constable lyon arrested mr.
glasman, he did in fact have grounds to believe his ability to drive was
impaired by alcohol and he also believed subjectively that he had those
grounds.  this was, therefore, a lawful arrest.
moving from there, whether mr.
glasman was ultimately charged with impaired driving or driving with
excess blood alcohol is neither here nor there.  these are decisions that
thousands of officers will make in tens of thousands of cases across the
country.  they will make charging decisions on a case-by-case basis and
any given officer will not have the same charging approach as any other
officer.  this is a matter determined by the facts of each case, the
experience of each officer and the philosophy of the officer, but the fact
that mr. glasman was not ultimately charged with impaired driving in no
way whatsoever undermines whether or not there were objectively reasonable
grounds to have arrested him for that charge or to have proceeded with
that charge.  in this case, he was arrested for impaired and the police
laid an excess blood alcohol charge.  no constitutional issue arises
therefrom.
i note that even if there had been
no grounds to arrest mr. glasman for impaired operation, so long as there
were the inescapably clear grounds for the “over 80” charge, the
significance of any such “false arrest”, while regrettable, would have
been trifling because all the negative consequences of such a “false
arrest” would have been exactly the same for the “false arrest” (the
impaired, in mr. wulkan’s argument) and for the clearly valid charge (the
“over 80” charge that was ultimately laid).  the idea that such a minor slip
of the tongue by a police officer, with no conceivable real-world impact
on the defendant should lead to potential exclusion under s. 24(2) would
be ambitious in the extreme.
the right to counsel issue
mr. wulkan also argues that
sergeant mask violated mr. glasman's s. 10(b) right to counsel.
this, mr. wulkan says, arises out of comments by sergeant mask to mr.
glasman in the breath room to the effect that mr. glasman would have to
provide two breath samples whether he spoke to a lawyer or not, as well as
sergeant mask asking mr. glasman what had changed between when mr. glasman
had turned down counsel when it was offered minutes before during parading
and him now asking to speak to counsel short minutes later.
as i said earlier, i am perplexed
by why any officer, including an officer of sergeant mask’s experience
would tell a detainee that he has to provide samples, regardless of
whether he speaks to a lawyer or not or would ask a detainee, what has
changed in the detainee’s mind since he just declined counsel in the
booking process literally minutes earlier.  the statements about the
obligation to provide a sample are absolutely true, but the constitutional
concern is that it might send the message to a detainee that there is no
point in talking to counsel since the detainee will have to provide
samples no matter what.  that could be interpreted as demeaning of the
utility of counsel or suggesting the futility of bothering to speak with
counsel.  all of that is concerning because a detainee is clearly in an
imbalance of power and the opportunity to speak with counsel allows him or
her a chance to inform him- or herself of their rights, their options,
potential consequences and any nuances that the detainee may wish to
discuss privately rather than with the police officer.
the same concern arises with
sergeant mask’s question to mr. glasman about why he had changed his mind
about consulting with counsel.  while it may seem odd that a person
changes his or her mind that quickly, any such “oddity” is irrelevant.
subject to what i say later, it is none of the officer’s concern.
exercising or not exercising one’s right to counsel is not a “one and
done” kind of right.  the danger with an officer asking why is again that
the question could be seen as an implicit discouragement from exercising a
core constitutional right.  if it is true as sergeant mask testified, that
he simply wanted to understand if there had been anything in his or
constable lyon’s treatment of mr. glasman that had raised concerns (and i
think in light of the overall evidence that that is actually true), the time
for asking that question while still avoiding any risk of jeopardizing the
detainee’s s. 10(b) rights, would be after the entire process is over,
just as it would be appropriate after a person has had access to counsel
but then refuses to provide a sample, to tell that person that refusal is
itself an offence (while leaving counsel out of the sentence entirely).
in virtually every case where utterances
such as these are made the
charter
challenge for the crown would be
insurmountable, except for one enormous difference:  sergeant mask
immediately called out to constable lyon to arrange counsel and made it
clear to mr. glasman that he was not causing any inconvenience by
exercising his right. mr. glasman then spoke with counsel for about ten
minutes before providing the samples.
there is, necessarily, a chasm
between this case and cases where officers make similar comments and the
defendant does not exercise his or her right to counsel.  these utterances
are still concerning, because of the risk they create, but if the
constitutional right to access to counsel is actually satisfied, then
there is no breach.
in this case, however, mr. glasman
testified that he had limited his time with counsel because he thought
there might be “repercussions” from the police in light of how sergeant
mask had behaved.  obviously, if i believed that was true, a s. 10(b)
breach would be made out, but given the totality of the exchange seen on
video and given the serious concerns i have stated about mr. glasman’s reliability
as a witness, perceiving agitation and intimidation on sergeant mask’s
part where none such was objectively evident, i reject his assertion that
he would have spoken to counsel longer.  indeed, sergeant mask
specifically said to mr. glasman after arranging for counsel that mr.
glasman was not inconveniencing him in any way.  sergeant mask was very
foolish to have said the things he said about the samples regardless of
speaking to counsel and for asking the reason for mr. glasman’s change of
heart, but i do not take anything he said as being insincere.
it may well be that mr. glasman has
come to believe he was time-limited, but i do not take that as being even
remotely factual, never mind that it is more likely than not.
in the course of his questions and
submissions, mr. wulkan sought to portray mr. glasman as a submissive,
deer-in-headlights sort of character whose vulnerability should have been
obvious to anyone, suggesting that his hand gestures, for example, were a marker
of submission that sergeant mask should have picked up on and that showed
a particular vulnerability.  sergeant mask did not accept that
characterization and neither do i on all of the evidence.  mr. glasman was
definitely quiet, calm and polite.  he was never argumentative or
obnoxious.  he was uncertain about what to do and to some extent sought
guidance from sergeant mask about that, which sergeant mask made clear was
not advice he could give.  in other words, mr. glasman came across in the
same way that the vast majority of impaired-driving detainees come across
in the breath room.  other than the imbalance of power that is always
inherent in these situations, there was no particular vulnerability on his
part.
to the contrary, i noted that at one point, mr. glasman tried to parlay
some supposed fraternity between firefighters (his profession) and the
police, which can only be taken as a hint at some accommodation that
sergeant mask might make in recognition of that fraternity.  to his
credit, sergeant mask made it clear to mr. glasman that that was
irrelevant to his role as a police officer, but what it shows is that mr.
glasman was not overwhelmed by the situation.
i am satisfied that there was no breach
of mr. glasman’s right to counsel.  to the contrary, while i remain
perplexed about sergeant mask intermingling any comment about the
inevitability of breath samples with access to counsel discussions, i am
satisfied on the entirety of the evidence and the entirety of sergeant
mask’s comments to mr. glasman that sergeant mask made the availability of
counsel clear and facilitated mr. glasman’s access to counsel immediately
upon mr. glasman’s change of mind and that none of sergeant mask’s
unfortunate comments compromised the quality of mr. glasman’s access to
counsel, including its duration and coverage of any issues mr. glasman may
have wanted to discuss privately.
in the result, no breach of the
right to counsel has been made out.
it is for the foregoing reasons
that i conclude that there was no breach of mr. glasman’s rights under the
charter
.  with respect to the merits, the charge was clearly made
out beyond a reasonable doubt, leading me to find mr. glasman guilty as
charged.
released:
25 july, 2025
this
was an error on constable lyon’s part as the asd regime defines a pass as 0-50,
a warn as 50-100 and a fail as anything over 100.  that error, however, is
neither here nor there in the circumstances of this case.
the
asd result provides grounds to the arresting officer, for both the “over 80”
and “impaired offence”.  for evidentiary purposes at trial, however, if an
impaired driving charge is laid and is dependent on the blood alcohol level, it
would likely be necessary for the crown to call a biologist to interpret the
breathalyzer results and their relationship to impairment beyond a reasonable
doubt.
it
was suggested that mr. glasman’s hand gestures demonstrated submissiveness or
vulnerability.  some gestures may convey that impression, but none of mr.
glasman’s gestures were, either alone or in combination with his evidence,
demonstrative of that.  the reality is that some people are extremely
expressive with their hands all of the time and others not at all.  i have no
basis upon which to read mr. glasman’s gestures as reflective of anything other
than normal conversation.