citation:
r. v. lavorato
, 2025
oncj 714
date:  september 26, 2025
court file no.: 23-47107325
ontario  court  of
justice
between:
his  majesty  the  king
—  and  —
peter lavorato and giovanni imbesi
before justice t.  lipson
heard on april
22-25, june 27,2025
reasons for
judgment released on  september 26, 2025
l. mehkeri  ............................................................................................................   for
the crown
m. muia   ..................................................................................   for
the accused   peter lavorato
m. mann  ……………………………………………………………  for
the accused
giovanni imbesi
lipson j.:
reasons
for judgment
overview
of the case
peter lavorato
entered pleas of not guilty to three counts of fraud over $5000. his co-accused
giovanni imbesi entered a plea of not guilty to one count of fraud over $5000.
peter lavorato, and
the crown’s main witness, richard mandarino, were long-time acquaintances. they
met in high school and became close friends during college, where they studied
business administration at seneca college. they often commuted together and
shared a mutual interest in sports and sports gambling.
after college, they
lost touch but reconnected around 2014–2015. their renewed friendship involved
regular meetings, often for lunch. mr. lavorato would also settle mr.
mandarino's gambling debts with a bookie and be reimbursed by him later. mr.
mandarino described mr. lavorato as a “runner” in an illegal sports betting
operation. mr. mandarino understood mr. lavorato’s role as a “runner” as
follows: “it’s an individual who has people who bet on the website, and it’s
their responsibility to either collect the money that’s owed or pay the money
that’s owed at the end of every week.”
mr. lavorato testified
“i would see my bookie on a weekly basis and would settle my own affairs as
well as those of richard. i’d cover him, and he’d pay me back. that’s how it
worked.”
mr. lavorato
further testified that he charged mandarino interest on these loans and that
mandarino always repaid him on time until august 2017.
mr. mandarino was
employed as an accountant with a firm called walsh construction. he was also
addicted to gambling. mr. mandarino had access to accounting systems in the
company and he used these accounting systems to create and process fraudulent
invoices and unauthorized cheques. he manipulated journal entries to hide
fraudulent payments. mr. mandarino did all of this to both “clear” his gambling
debts and keep money from his company for other personal use.
mr. mandarino
testified that he and mr. lavorato agreed to a scheme to clear his gambling
debts as well as obtain extra funds for personal use. mr. mandarino would issue
fraudulent company cheques to mr. lavorato for supposed work or services
performed for the company. there was no work or services performed by mr.
lavorato or his company for walsh construction. according to mr. mandarino,
they agreed to split the proceeds 50/50 after remitting 15% for income tax and
13% for hst. any debts that mandarino owed would be taken from his 50 per cent
share. mr. mandarino testified that mr. lavorato knew the cheques came from his
employer’s account and that lavorato suggested using his company ventava inc as
the payee.
mr. mandarino testified
that he instructed mr. lavorato to record the funds properly in his business
books. he testified, “i do recall- remember him, telling him to do that to make
sure that everything was kosher on his end, and not, not to do anything else
with this, to record it properly…”
mr. mandarino
testified that he issued two fraudulent cheques to peter lavorato’s company,
ventava inc., as part of their agreement to convert company funds into cash.
two cheques were issued to ventava inc. the first cheque was issued on may 23,
2017, for $127,829.48. the second cheque was issued on august 16, 2017, for $126,923.13.
mr. mandarino admitted to manipulating walsh construction’s accounting system
to generate these cheques and that ventava was not entitled to this money from
walsh construction.
mr. lavorato and
mr. imbesi, according to mr. lavorato, had known each other for over 30 years
and were close friends. richard mandarino testified that giovanni imbesi became
involved in the fraudulent cheque scheme through peter lavorato. mandarino
stated that he did not have a direct relationship with imbesi and had only met
him a few times, primarily when lavorato was unavailable to collect gambling
debts. he testified that it was peter lavorato who told him that mr. imbesi
wanted to participate in the cheque scheme. mr. mandarino created a cheque made
out to gbsi (imbesi’s company) based on this communication from lavorato.  mr.
mandarino issued a cheque for $120, 921.30 dated july 5, 2017, to mr. imbesi’s
company gbsi. it was deposited to the bank account of gbsi on july 10, 2017.
all instructions and coordination regarding the cheque were relayed through
lavorato.  mr. mandarino had no direct dealings with mr. imbesi in relation to
the cheque.
mr. mandarino
testified that after issuing the second fraudulent cheque to ventava inc on
august 16, 2017, he received a bank draft for $88,000 from peter lavorato. he
explained that this payment was meant to reconcile both the second ventana
cheque and the earlier gbsi cheque (linked to mr. imbesi) which had been
flagged by the bank and not split as originally intended. mr. mandarino
testified, “so the secondary cheque to ventava, when we did the calculations of
both, less the debts, that the net difference and that was agreed upon, which
is why it happened.” not all of the $88,500 went toward gambling debts but into
his joint bank account with his wife. mr. mandarino told her it was a “windfall”
from walsh construction.
mr. mandarino pled
guilty to wire fraud in the united states. the charges stemmed from his role in
this fraudulent scheme involving the issuance of unauthorized cheques from
walsh construction accounts to the accused and others. he is facing a custodial
sentence of 26 months. his cooperation with canadian authorities was at the
time of his sentencing hearing and at the time of this trial was a condition in
his plea agreement with u.s. authorities.
in his testimony,
mr. lavorato denied knowing the cheques issued by mr. mandarino from walsh construction
were fraudulent. he testified that he believed mandarino was a part-owner of
walsh construction and had lawful authority to issue the cheques. he did not
participate in or understand the manipulation of walsh’s accounting systems.
mr. lavorato believed the cheques were legitimate repayments for loans he had
made to mandarino to cover mandarino’s gambling debts. he testified that mr. mandarino
always repaid him on time and showed no signs of financial distress until much
later. he saw no “red flags” in the issuance of the walsh cheques to him or mr.
mandarino's conduct that would have prompted his suspicion. mr. lavorato
explained that he asked mandarino how repayment for his gambling debts by
cheque would work. mr. mandarino explained the need to remit hst and income
tax. lavorato followed this advice and relied on his accountant to handle
remittances. he did not attempt to conceal these transactions. the cheques were
deposited into his business account and reported.
with respect to mr.
imbesi’s involvement, mr. mandarino testified that the cheque issued to gbsi
(imbesi’s company) was facilitated by lavorato. he stated that he did not deal
directly with imbesi. all communication went through lavorato. mr. mandarino
claimed that lavorato told him that imbesi wanted to participate in the scheme.
mandarino said he instructed lavorato to tell imbesi to remit hst and income
tax to make the transaction appear legitimate. he also testified that the funds
from the gbsi cheque were not withdrawn immediately due to concerns about
scrutiny from the bank, and that he did not receive any money from that cheque.
the cheque was held at the bank and later cleared after he called the bank. he
claimed he did not receive any funds from the gbsi cheque due to risk of detection.
the gbsi cheque was used to repay loans to lavorato.
mr. lavorato
testified that mandarino approached him asking to cash a cheque so that he
could pay his workers in cash. mr. lavorato said he was already making money
from mandarino through loans and suggested involving mr. imbesi instead, as a
way to help his financially struggling friend. mr. lavorato described imbesi as
being “like a brother” and someone he had supported financially for years. mr. lavorato
claimed that he never told mandarino that imbesi wanted to be part of a cheque
cashing scheme. he said the idea was to let imbesi benefit from the
transaction, not to involve him in fraud. lavorato also testified that mr. mandarino
later told him to treat the gbsi cheque as repayment for loans, and that he
(lavorato) did not believe the cheque was fraudulent.
positions
of the parties regarding mr. lavorato’s alleged criminal liability
the crown submits
that mr. lavorato knowingly participated in the fraudulent cheque scheme
orchestrated by mr. mandarino. mr. lavorato received two cheques totalling
$254,752.61 from walsh construction which he deposited into his company
ventava’s account. the crown argues that mr. lavorato had no legitimate
entitlement to those funds and that his conduct constituted fraud over $5000.
the crown relies on
the evidence of mr. mandarino who testified that he told mr. lavorato about the
fraudulent nature of the cheques and that their primary purpose was to pay off
mandarino's gambling debts. according to mr. mandarino, mr. lavorato instructed
him to make the cheques payable to ventava inc. mr. lavorato remitted income
tax and hst on the funds which the crown submits was done to make the
transactions appear legitimate. the crown asserts that these remittances were
knowingly false and part of a scheme to avoid detection.
the crown submits
that even if mr. lavorato did not possess actual knowledge, he was wilfully
blind as to the fraudulent scheme. the crown argues that there were several red
flags which the defendant deliberately ignored. they included the unusually
large cheque amounts, the cheques being from a us based company with no
connection to mr. lavorato and the remittance of taxes on what mr. lavorato
claimed were loan repayments. the crown submits that a reasonable person would
view mr. lavorato’s conduct as dishonest. his actions of accepting large
cheques, remitting taxes and involving a third party, mr. imbesi, demonstrate a
fraudulent intent.
the defence submits
that mr. lavorato lacked knowledge and intent to commit fraud. counsel for mr.
lavorato contends that he believed the funds he received were legitimate loan
repayment from mr. mandarino, whom he thought was a part-owner of walsh
construction. the defence submits that mr. lavorato was credible when he
testified that he had no reason to suspect that the cheques were fraudulent. he
believed that mr. mandarino had the authority to issue the cheques and he had
always repaid his loans reliably. mr. lavorato deposited the cheques openly in
his business account and taxes were remitted on his accountant’s advice.
the defence
vigorously challenges the credibility of mr. mandarino describing him as a liar
and fraudster with a motive to shift blame. it is submitted that mr.
mandarino's testimony was inconsistent and speculative, particularly regarding
his alleged conversations with mr. lavorato about the fraudulent nature of the
cheques. mr. lavorato had no access to walsh construction’s internal systems
and did not participate in falsifying records. he relied on mr. mandarino's
representations and had no reason to doubt his legitimacy. the defence also
pointed to mr. lavorato’s lack of sophistication in business and accounting
matters. defence counsel submits that mr. lavorato’s conduct, while perhaps
naïve, was not fraudulent.
positions
of the parties with respect to mr. imbesi’s criminal liability
the crown alleges
that giovanni imbesi was a knowing participant in a fraudulent scheme
orchestrated by richard mandarino. this theory of liability is based on the
doctrine of wilful blindness, asserting that mr. imbesi either knew or
deliberately avoided confirming that the funds he received were the proceeds of
fraud.
mr. imbesi’s
company, gbsi, received a cheque for $120, 921.30 from walsh construction. the crown
submits that gbsi had no contractual relationship with walsh construction and
performed no work for that company. the cheque bore a chicago address and was
signed by an individual named “timothy”. mr. imbesi was instructed by mr.
lavorato to remit income tax and hst on the funds, despite no taxable services
being rendered. the crown argues that these circumstances establish mr.
imbesi’s wilful blindness to the fraudulent nature of the transaction. the
crown relies, in part, on the testimony of mr. mandarino who stated that mr.
lavorato informed that mr. imbesi wished to participate in the scheme. it seeks
to admit this evidence under the co-conspirator exception to the hearsay rule.
the crown submits that the false remittance of taxes was a deliberate attempt
to legitimize the transaction and avoid detection.
the defence submits
that mr. imbesi had no knowledge of or involvement in a fraudulent scheme. it
is submitted that he was unwittingly drawn into the matter at the request of
mr. lavorato and had no reason to suspect that the cheque was illegitimate.
the defence points
to the evidence that mr. imbesi was asked by mr. lavorato to deposit a cheque
as a favour to mr. mandarino, who claimed he needed to pay workers in cash. it
is submitted that mr. imbesi was not told the cheque was fraudulent and had no
prior dealings with walsh construction. the remittance of the income tax and
hst was done on mr. lavorato’s advice and was not indicative of any fraudulent
intent. the defence submits that that no direct evidence links mr. imbesi to
knowledge of the fraud or any agreement to participate in it. the defence
submits that mr. mandarino's evidence is neither credible nor reliable. mr.
mandarino is an unsavoury witness with a history of deceit and a motive to minimize
his own culpability. it is submitted that mr. mandarino's statements about mr.
imbesi’s involvement are speculative, inconsistent and uncorroborated.
the defence submits
that the crown has failed to prove the requisite mens rea-either knowledge or wilful
blindness- beyond a reasonable doubt.
applicable
legal principles
presumption
of innocence and burden of proof
mr lavorato and mr.
imbesi are presumed to be innocent of the charges against them. this
presumption continues unless and until the crown has proven their guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt. neither accused was under any obligation to testify during
the trial. neither accused has to prove anything, including his innocence.
the burden of proof
rests on the crown alone. the crown must prove the offences beyond a reasonable
doubt. this standard of proof means that the court must not convict mr.
lavorato or mr. imbesi if he is probably guilty or likely guilty. reasonable
doubt falls much closer to absolute certainty than to proof on a balance of
probabilities. however, reasonable doubt does not require proof to an absolute
certainty. that would be nearly impossible:
r. v lifchus
,
s.c.j.
no. 77
.
credibility
the credibility of
the witnesses is an important issue in this case.
mr. lavorato
testified in his own defence. i am guided by the following analytic framework
in
r. v w(d)
,
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 742
for the assessment of the accused’s
testimony. first, if i believe the evidence of the accused, i must acquit.
secondly, if i do not believe the testimony of the accused, but am left in
reasonable doubt by it, i must acquit. thirdly, even if i am not left in doubt
by the evidence of the accused, i must ask myself whether, on the basis of the
evidence i do accept, i am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by the evidence
of the guilt of the accused. the defence emphasizes that lavorato testified
credibly, consistently, and transparently. the crown argues that lavorato’s
explanations are implausible and inconsistent with the evidence, particularly
regarding his understanding of mandarino's role and the nature of the funds.
it is important to
remember that a criminal trial is not a credibility contest. it is a trial to
determine whether the crown has proved the guilt of the accused on the specific
charges beyond a reasonable doubt. it is, therefore, wrong to decide a criminal
case where there is conflicting evidence about whether the accused is guilty,
simply by deciding which version of events is preferred. mere disbelief of the
evidence offered by the accused to show his innocence should not be treated as
proof of the guilt of the accused. the evidence must be considered as a whole.
the defence submits
that it is dangerous to base a conviction on the unconfirmed testimony of mr.
mandarino in deciding whether the crown has proven the guilt of the accused
beyond a reasonable doubt. the crown does not disagree that a
vetrovec
warning
is appropriate. a
vetrovec
warning is a caution to treat the evidence of
an unsavoury witness with care unless corroborated by independent evidence:
r.
v. vetrovec
,
1982 canlii 20 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 811
elements
of the offence of fraud
the leading
authority on the elements of fraud is
r. v. theroux
,
1993 canlii 134 (scc)
,
2 scr 5
. the
crown must prove the following beyond a reasonable doubt: an act of deceit,
falsehood or other fraudulent means; deprivation or risk of deprivation to
another, here walsh construction. those elements comprise the
actus reus
of the offence of fraud.
with respect to the
mens rea
, the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that each
accused had a subjective knowledge that the prohibited act could cause
deprivation or risk of deprivation. this does not require proof that the
accused knew the conduct was wrong not does it require proof that the accused
personally felt that the conduct was wrong. further, an accused’s subjective
belief can from be inferred from the act itself, barring some explanation
casting doubt on such inference. the crown also need not prove that the
prohibited act was dishonest.
the crown argues
that lavorato’s conduct—accepting large cheques from a company he had no
dealings with, remitting false taxes, and facilitating similar conduct by
imbesi—meets these criteria. the defence contends that lavorato lacked both
knowledge and intent, believing the funds were legitimate loan repayments.
the third element
that the crown must prove is that the accused was aware of the prohibited act.
this does not
require proof that the accused knew the conduct was wrong nor does it require
proof that the accused personally felt that the conduct was wrong. further, an
accused’s subjective awareness can be inferred from the act itself, barring
some explanation casting doubt on such inference.
the crown also need
not prove that the accused knew that the prohibited act was dishonest.
in
r.
v. eizenga
,
2011 onca 113
at para.
81
, the ontario court of appeal (
citing
theroux
,
in part) stated as follows:
with respect to the
mens rea
, the court [scc]
specifically rejected a definition that required subjective awareness of
dishonesty and a belief that actual deprivation (as opposed to risk of
deprivation) will result. the court held at para 23: “[t]he accused’s belief
that the conduct is not wrong or that no one will in the end be hurt affords no
defence to a charge of fraud.”
recklessness as to
the consequences of the prohibited act also attracts criminal responsibility:
theroux
at para.
20
. furthermore, subjective awareness can be inferred from the act
itself, barring some explanation casting doubt on such inference:
theroux
at para.
18
.
it is not a defence
to claim reliance on some advice, such as from an accountant, as justification
for the conduct.
in
eizenga
at paras.
49 to 52
, the court of appeal
stated that reliance on the advice of another would be a mistake of law and not
a defence.
the crown must
prove that the accused knew or was reckless as to the possibility of economic
harm to the victim:
r. v. zlatic
,
1993 canlii 135 (scc)
,
2 scr 29
. the accused need not
have any specific intention to cause harm and indeed may have genuinely hoped
none would result.
the crown submits
that even if the court is left with a reasonable doubt with respect to whether
mr. lavorato had subjective knowledge of the falsification of records at walsh
construction by mr. mandarino, he did possess subjective knowledge that he was
a participant in a fraud perpetrated by “other fraudulent means”. mr lavorato
took cheques he was not entitled to, used a portion to pay mr. mandarino's
illegal gambling debt, used a portion for personal gain, and then set aside a
portion for false tax remittance to make the transaction seem more legitimate.
the crown argues that applying the objective test from theroux, a reasonable
person would view the matter as a dishonest dealing.
the crown also
submits that the evidence at trial supports a finding that mr. lavorato was, at
the very least, wilfully blind to the fact that he was engaged in dishonest
dealing. the criminal law treats wilful blindness as equivalent to knowledge.
it is a form of subjective
mens rea
. it is a culpable mental state
wherein the court presumes knowledge because of the accused’s deliberate
ignorance of the reality of his or her actions. a finding of wilful blindness
involves an affirmative answer to the question: “did the accused shut his eyes
because he knew or strongly suspected that looking would fix him with knowledge?”:
r. v. jorgensen
,
1995 canlii 85 (scc)
,
4 scr 55
at para
87
. wilful blindness is more
than mere recklessness. the criminal law treats wilful blindness as equivalent
to actual knowledge.
the crown argues
that lavorato’s failure to inquire about the source of the cheques, the
legitimacy of the remitted taxes, the identity of the issuing company (wcc
construction canada, ulc), and the lack of any work performed, demonstrates
deliberate ignorance.  the defence argues that lavorato had no reason to
suspect wrongdoing, trusted mandarino, and acted on advice from his accountant.
his conduct was consistent with naivete, not criminal intent. mr. imbesi argues
that he relied on mr. lavorato and had no reason to question the legitimacy of
the cheque his company received.
co-conspirator’s
exception to the hearsay rule
this exception
allows statements made by one conspirator to be admissible against another if:
1. a conspiracy or common criminal enterprise is proven beyond a reasonable
doubt. 2. the accused was a member of the conspiracy on a balance of
probabilities. 3.the statement was made in furtherance of the conspiracy:
r.
v. carter
,
1982 canlii 35 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 938
the crown seeks to
admit lavorato’s alleged statement to mandarino that imbesi wanted to
participate in the scheme. the defence challenges the reliability of this
evidence and argues that it is inadmissible hearsay unsupported by independent
proof of a conspiracy.
analysis
there is no dispute
that mr. mandarino was an employee of walsh construction and that he unlawfully
issued cheques on the bank account of walsh construction. these cheques are
detailed in a spreadsheet filed as exhibit 4. the cheques were written in
favour of various companies including peter lavorato’s company ventava inc and
giovanni imbesi’s company gbsi. two cheques totalling 254,752.61 were drawn on
the bank account of ventava and written in favour of ventava.
the court heard
evidence from walsh employees, tim brescia and colin laughlin, which
established beyond a reasonable doubt that ventava and gbsi were not entitled
to any funds from walsh because they were not legitimate vendors for walsh and
had never done any work for the company. there is no dispute that these
witnesses established that mr. mandarino created false entries in the accounting
software of walsh construction to avoid detection.
there is no
evidence that either accused was personally involved in falsifying the
accounting records at walsh. there is no evidence that either had specific
knowledge of the exact means used by mr. mandarino to manipulate the accounting
entries at walsh.
crown and defence
agree that the main issue for the court to decide is whether the crown has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. lavorato and mr imbesi possessed
knowledge of the fraudulent nature of the cheques they received through mr.
mandarino.
the crown argues
that both accused knew that they were not able to lawfully possess any money
from walsh construction. at the very least, says the crown, both accused were
wilfully blind to that fact.
the crown submits
that to take money from walsh construction, to which they had no colour of
right, for personal gains, represents a dishonest dealing. on mr. mandarino's advice,
mr. lavorato set aside funds to generate false income tax and hst remittances,
which the crown argues was done to make the funds deposited to ventava’s
account seem legitimate and avoid detection. mr. lavorato communicated to mr.
imbesi that he should do the same. the crown submits that this is further
evidence that both accused knowingly misappropriated funds from walsh
construction.
it is the position
of the defence that mr. lavorato was owed money by mr. mandarino. he believed
mr. mandarino to be part owner of the company and had the lawful authority to
disburse and direct funds accordingly.
a
vetrovec
warning
is required in the assessment of mr. mandarino’s credibility
i begin with my
assessment of the evidence of mr. mandarino. i agree with the position of the
defence that mr. mandarino was an unsavoury witness. his evidence was marked by
internal inconsistencies and vague recollections, particularly concerning the
very conversations he claimed to have had with mr. lavorato about the
fraudulent cheques. mr. mandarino explained that mr. lavorato’s involvement “would
have” resulted from a discussion between the two men. he could not recall when
it happened, where it happened, how the conversation went, what was said or not
said. when asked about the conversation in his statement to the police on
september 29, 2023, mr. mandarino said, “i don’t know how it would have come
about. i just think it’s fair to assume that i would have told him what i was
doing and at one point he may, mr. lavorato, may have said, can we do one too.”
when asked in chief about the conversation, mr. mandarino replied that he was
“assuming i told him what i was doing, and we agreed to introduce his company
to clear out the debts as well. he told the court that “it’s very hard to
remember exactly how the conversation happened”. he had no recollection of the
discussion of what the amount of each cheque was supposed to be. he did not
have a recollection of mr. lavorato asking him to issue a cheque to ventava,
yet he asserted it was mr. lavorato who told him to make the cheque payable to
ventava inc. mr. mandarino agreed in cross-examination that it was possible
that it was his idea to settle his debts with mr. lavorato using the cheques from
walsh construction.
i agree with the
need for a
vetrovec
warning
regarding mr. mandarino's testimony. at the
time of trial, mr. mandarino was the subject of an ongoing prosecution in
chicago. he pled guilty to wire fraud in relation to his involvement in the
fraud on walsh construction. he has yet to be formally sentenced but the
sentencing judge views mr. mandarino's cooperation with canadian authorities as
a mitigating factor. mr. mandarino has a vested interested in testifying in
this trial. as mr. mandarino himself admitted, he hoped that his participation
in this trial and cooperation with the authorities would mitigate his sentence.
he wishes to avoid a lengthy jail sentence by testifying in this proceeding. he
said, “well i’m doing all my best to, to have the less sentence as possible,
absolutely. i mean who wouldn’t?”  mr. mandarino anticipates receiving a
sentence of 26 months which is predicated in part on his cooperation with
authorities in the prosecution against mr. lavorato and mr. imbesi.
mr. mandarino
admitted that his gambling addiction has led him to lie and be dishonest with
his employers and his wife. he admitted that lying was a part of his gambling
addiction and that he would create elaborate stories about the money he would
spend or the money he received. he admitted lying to mr. brescia about how the
fraudulent cheque scheme came to be. he planted the idea with mr. brescia and
later prosecutors in the us that his life was at risk and that he was in danger
because he got involved with bad people. at trial mr. mandarino said he did not
mean his actual physical life was at risk but rather it was emotional and
financial risk he was facing. he implicated another individual named john
aquino as the one who had the idea to have the debt paid back by getting a
cheque from walsh construction. yet he agreed that he told mr. brescia that he
already had a plan in place about getting the cheques when he went to see mr.
aquino. he made no mention to mr. brescia about any role played by mr.
lavorato.
while i appreciate
that i may rely on mr. mandarino's testimony, even if it is not confirmed by
other evidence, the proper course is to look for independent evidence tending
to show that mr. mandarino's testimony implicating the accused is true. by
“independent”, i mean from a source not connected to mr. mandarino.
i treat mr.
mandarino's testimony with considerable caution. with this proposition firmly
in mind, i turn to determine whether the crown has proven the requisite
elements of fraud beyond a reasonable doubt.
has the
crown proven the elements of fraud beyond a reasonable doubt?
according to
theroux
,
the offence of fraud has four elements:
1.
an act of deceit, a falsehood or some other fraudulent means
2.
deprivation or risk of deprivation to another caused by the prohibited act
3.
subjective knowledge of the prohibited act; and
4. subjective knowledge that the prohibited act could
cause deprivation or risk of deprivation to another
1. an
act of deceit, a falsehood or some other fraudulent means
the focus with
respect to this inquiry is on “other fraudulent means”. the analysis with
respect to whether an act consisted of “other fraudulent means” is an objective
analysis. reference is to be made to what reasonable people would consider to
be a dishonest dealing.
the crown submits
that mr. lavorato was a party to mr. mandarino's acts of deception at walsh
construction. it relies on the testimony of mr. mandarino who claimed that he
explained to lavorato what he was doing with the cheques. mr. lavorato denied
that this occurred. only mr. mandarino and mr. lavorato known the truth.
there is no
independent evidence to support mr. mandarino's assertion. i am unable to
safely rely on mr. mandarino's evidence alone in this regard for the reasons
set out earlier. i am unable to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
lavorato had direct knowledge of mr. mandarino’s falsification of records at
walsh construction. however, it is also the case that mr. lavorato was not
entitled to funds from walsh construction but did take possession of them for
payment of mandarino's gambling debt, directed a portion to their personal use
and directed that a portion to be set aside for false income tax and hst
remittances to avoid detection. on an objective analysis, a reasonable person
would regard this as a dishonest dealing. as
stated in
r v zlatic
,
1993 canlii 135 (scc)
,
2 scr 29
, the dishonesty of “other fraudulent means, has at his heart,
the wrongful use of something which another person has an interest, in such a
manner that this other’s interest is extinguished or put at risk. in this case,
the crown has established beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused engaged in
conduct properly characterized as “other fraudulent means”.
2.  deprivation
or risk of deprivation to another caused by the prohibited act
the second element
of the offence of fraud requires that the prohibited act caused deprivation or
a risk of deprivation. there is no dispute that the taking of funds from walsh
construction caused economic deprivation to walsh construction.
3.
subjective knowledge of the prohibited act
the crown must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. lavorato was aware of the prohibited
act. i am required to apply the principles regarding this essential element
which were outlined earlier in the section of these reasons dealing with this issue.
the crown relies on
the direct evidence of mr. mandarino who testified that he “would have” told
mr. lavorato that he was manipulating cheques from his employer in order to
clear his gambling debts. he also claimed that it was mr. lavorato who told him
to make the cheque payable to ventava inc. mr. mandarino testified there was a
specific agreement in place in which lavorato would remit 15% of the cheque as
income tax, 13% for hst and the remainder of the funds would be split equally
between mandarino and lavorato.  mr. mandarino testified that he never said or
did anything to lead mr. lavorato to believe that he was entitled to money from
walsh. the crown argues that the steps admitted by mr. lavorato with respect to
the setting aside of hst and taxes were taken to avoid detection and constitute
strong evidence of his subjective knowledge of a dishonest act.
as submitted by the
crown, it is true that there is confirmation for mr. mandarino’s account of his
fraudulent activity. his testimony about the manner in which he falsified the
records at walsh construction was corroborated by the evidence of walsh
employees brescia and laughlin. his testimony about the use of random invoices
in support of his entries for ventava and gbsi was supported by the records of
walsh construction. his explanation of how he used a ledger normally reserved
for hst because it was seldom checked was corroborated by brescia and laughlin.
mr. mandarino’s testimony about the creation of false vendors was consistent
with the records of walsh entered into evidence. his testimony about other
fraudulent cheques he issued and parties he worked with to do so is
corroborated by the records of the falsified cheques investigation in exhibit
4. his testimony about his gambling addiction is confirmed by mr. lavorato.
as indicated
earlier in these reasons, i approach mr. mandarino's testimony, where
uncorroborated by independent evidence, with great caution. there is no
corroboration that he told mr. lavorato about the cheque scheme. while the
financial records and testimony from walsh construction staff confirm that the
fraud occurred, this evidence does not speak directly to mr. lavorato’s
knowledge of the fraud.
i agree with the
crown that there is good reason to believe that mandarino would have communicated
to lavorato the nature of the fraudulent cheque scheme he was committing
against walsh construction, if not for any other reason, to explain to mr.
lavorato why mandarino was instructing him to set aside funds for hst and
income tax. however, mr. mandarino's inability to recall the specifics of
conversations with mr. lavorato on this issue as well as the other dangers
present in accepting his testimony as outlined earlier, do not lead the court
to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. lavorato had subjective
knowledge of the falsification of records which mandarino perpetrated at walsh
construction.
i am not satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the crown has proven that mr. lavorato knew the
exact nature of the fraudulent cheque scheme employed by mr. mandarino.
wilful
blindness
i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. lavorato, at the very least, was wilfully
blind to the fact he was engaging in a dishonest dealing.
i first set out the
details of mr. lavorato’s defence.
in his testimony mr
lavorato denied any knowledge or suspicion that the cheques were fraudulent. he
believed that mandarino was a part owner of walsh construction. he further
testified that he understood the funds to be legitimate repayment of the loan
and saw nothing unusual about their deposit into his business account.
mr. lavorato said
that when the two became close in college mandarino would tell him things about
his dad, his businesses and things he was involved in. he had visited
mandarino's family home and knew they had money and were comfortable and that
mr. mandarino's family paid for his education. he knows mr. mandarino's father
and that he has a successful career and business and worked on properties and
developments.
mr. lavorato
explained that he would see his bookie on a weekly basis and would settle his
own affairs as well as those of mr. mandarino. mr. lavorato would cover mr.
mandarino with the bookie and mr. mandarino would pay mr. lavorato back. mr.
lavorato charged interest on the money borrowed by mr. mandarino.
mr. lavorato testified
that he believed mr. mandarino had part ownership with his father in a
construction company. mr. mandarino often spoke of jobs coming up and jobs he
was closing. mr. mandarino's father was in the industry. he met mandarino in
the parking lot of walsh construction. mr. mandarino was frequently going on
vacations and looking to purchase vacation properties. mr. mandarino referred
to “his company”. mr. mandarino asked mr. lavorato to meet with herman ayala, a
business associate, to collect funds. mr. lavorato noted that the location he
was sent to was a business called new alliance and appeared to be legitimate.
mr. mandarino told mr. lavorato he needed to pay workers in cash for a job he
had coming up which resulted in the cheque to mr. imbesi. mr mandarino produced
cheques from walsh construction to pay off his loans to mr. mandarino, saying
he was tight on cash but could pay through his business. mr. mandarino never seemed
stressed about money or the amounts he was gambling. mr. mandarino claimed he
could not pay from his personal accounts as he was keeping his gambling a
secret from his wife. mr. mandarino never said that he was an accountant and
just an employee of walsh construction.
mr. lavorato
testified that there nothing that caused him to question or arouse suspicion
about mr. mandarino's employment or financial situation. mr. lavorato said he
trusted mr. mandarino. when he received the first cheque, he only looked at it
to confirm the amount and his company name. when the bank teller alerted him
that the company address was from the us, mr. lavorato’s reaction was that the
company must be “making a shit ton of money for them to be branching off into
the states.” it did not trigger any need to ask mr. mandarino.
mr. lavorato
explained that when mr. mandarino suggested paying back the loan through his
business, he inquired how that works. mr. mandarino explained that when depositing
the funds into his business account, mr. lavorato would owe hst and income tax,
both of which mr. mandarino would ensure where included on top of the loan
payment and interest. mr. lavorato testified that he trusted mr. mandarino
given his position and that mr. lavorato’s accountant had always told him to
collect hst and not spend it so it could be paid back to the government. he
explained that this accountant remitted his taxes and hst for hm. he also said
that ventava did not generate a lot of income. it was averaging $15,000-20,000.
he hired a lawyer to assist him in opening his business and hired an accountant
to take care of ventava’s accounting needs. he stressed in his testimony that
he is not a sophisticated individual.
mr. lavorato
testified that he was upset, shocked and angry with mandarino due to the extent
of mandarino’s gambling debts which grew to $250,000. mr. lavorato did lend mr.
mandarino $88,000 which was paid back. mr. lavorato was not aware that mr.
mandarino was gambling and accumulating other debt elsewhere. he felt lied to
and betrayed that his friend had hid this from him. mandarino was not able to
cover his debts and would need to get money from his parents. at this point,
mr. lavorato realized the extent of mr. mandarino financial problems. he cut
ties with mr. mandarino due to the lies and betrayal. mr. lavorato considered
mandarino to be his friend whom he trusted.
in summary, mr.
lavorato portrayed himself as an unsophisticated individual who naively assumed
that mr. mandarino was a part owner of walsh construction and had lawful
authority to issue the cheques he did.
i do not believe
for a moment that mr. lavorato is an unsophisticated individual or was he naïve
in his dealings with mr. mandarino. mr. lavorato has a two-year business
administration diploma. i found him to be an intelligent witness who possesses
considerable “street smarts”. his main source of income comes from gambling at
the casino where his discipline at the baccarat tables netted him a six-figure
income annually. he paid no tax on his income from gambling nor on his loan
interest income. his other source of income came from interest on providing
loans to repay gambling debts. an example of this is a very lucrative financial
arrangement which he had in place with mr. mandarino in regard to the repayment
of mr. mandarino’s gambling loans. mr. lavorato charged him interest payments
between 15% to 18% payable in full within one year regardless of how quickly
mandarin paid the debt. mr. lavorato was firmly established as a “runner” in
the world of illegal sports betting. i agree with the submission of the crown
that it is hard to understand how mr. lavorato would have been upset with a
reliable and lucrative client like mandarino for having acquired more debt.
despite paying no
tax on his gambling earnings or interest earned from private loans, mr.
lavorato remitted hst and taxes on the amounts he was receiving from walsh. i
am satisfied that he was doing this to make the transaction appear legitimate
because he knew it was unlawful.
i do not believe
mr. lavorato’s testimony that he did not deliberately refrain from making
inquiries about the cheques he received from mr. mandarino. there is a
compelling body of circumstantial evidence in support of the crown’s position
that mr. lavorato was, at the very least, wilfully blind to the fact that
obtaining cheques from walsh construction constituted a dishonest dealing which
risked depriving walsh construction of funds. that evidence includes these
uncontroverted facts:
-mr.
lavorato did no work for walsh construction and was not entitled to the funds
issued to him. he had no relationship with the company.
-the
cheques were from a company called walsh construction canada, ulc, with an
address in chicago and signed by an individual named timothy
-mandarino
instructed him to remit income tax and hst to the cra which he was not required
to remit, as though he had earned this income from walsh  and as though he
charged hst to walsh
-mandarino's
typical weekly gambling loan repayments to mr. lavorato were anywhere from a
couple of thousand to upwards of 10-15,000. the cheques from walsh construction
represented in the area of a 700% increase in funds which mandarino would
typically turn over to lavorato. also the cheques were significant
-mandarino
always paid his gambling debts to lavorato in cash, never before this by
cheques.
-corporate
funds from walsh were directed towards the payment of debts accrued through an
illegal sports-betting website
-mr.
lavorato made no effort to verify who “wcc construction” was, why mr. mandarino
could issue such cheques or why he was remitting tax on loan repayments.
i do not believe that
mr. mandarino ever purported to have an ownership interest in walsh
construction in his dealings with mr. lavorato. the accused said he assumed as
much even though he made no effort to verify what “wcc construction” was, why
mandarino could issue such large cheques and why he was remitting tax on loan
repayments.
despite their
seeming close relationship, mr. lavorato testified that mr. mandarino never
told him what he did for work and that they never got into specifics. mr.
lavorato’s supposed belief that mandarino was an owner of walsh was based on
assumptions and at no point did he ever clarify where mr. mandarino worked or
whether he, in fact, had any ownership in walsh. i reject mr. lavorato’s
evidence that he believed mandarino was the owner of walsh.
i accept mr.
mandarino’s testimony, which is supported by independent evidence, that, in
order to repay his considerable gambling debts, he began to generate cheques
drawn on the accounts of walsh construction and issue them to third parties,
including mr. lavorato’s company ventava inc. those third parties would then
keep a portion of the fraudulent cheque and hen direct a portion in cash to
mandarino who could then pay off his gambling debts. while i am unable to find
that mandarino told the accused about the specifics of his fraudulent cheque
scheme, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. lavorato was at the
very least wilfully blind to the fact that mandarino was engaging in a
dishonest dealing. did mr. lavorato shut his eyes because he knew or strongly
suspected that looking would fix him with knowledge? the answer is that the
prosecution has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that he did.
i would also make
these additional findings with respect to mr. lavorato’s criminal liability.
the crown presented
a strong and compelling circumstantial case that mr. lavorato was a knowing
participant in a fraud perpetrated by “other fraudulent means”. mr. lavorato
took cheques he was not entitled to, used a portion to pay mr. mandarino’s
illegal gambling debt, used a portion for personal gain, and then set aside
funds for false tax remittance to make the transaction appear legitimate. mr.
lavorato had no connection to walsh construction and was not entitled funds
from walsh since he had not done any work for the company. nevertheless, he
accepted cheques for significant sums of money. lavorato deposited these
cheques in his business account and also forwarded a cheque payable to mr.
imbesi’s company. mr. lavorato remitted income tax and hst to the cra even
though he did not owe the cra these amounts. the only plausible reason he did
so was to make the walsh payments appear legitimate- that is, to make it look
like he was a legitimate vendor who done work for walsh. mr. lavorato
instructed his friend mr. imbesi to deposit a similar cheque in a large sum
into mr. imbesi’ business account and make the same false remittances. mr.
imbesi’s company, like mr. lavorato’s company, had not done any work for walsh
construction, was not a legitimate vendor and was not entitled to the funds.
mr. lavorato kept large portions of the cheques issued to his company for his
personal use. i rejected mr. lavorato’s claim that he believed the cheques from
walsh were legitimate. nor did his evidence raise a reasonable doubt.
applying the
objective test from
theroux,
i am also satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that a reasonable person would view mr. lavorato’s act as dishonest
dealing. i find that the mr. lavorato knowingly participated in acts of what a
reasonable person would consider to be dishonest dealing.
mr.
imbesi’s criminal liability
mr. lavorato
testified that mandarino told him he needed to pay workers in cash and lavorato
suggested mr. imbesi could help. mr. mandarino agreed. mr. lavorato then
introduced mr. imbesi into the scheme. he told imbesi to remit taxes and
mandarino had instructed him to do. mr. lavorato had no recollection of mr.
imbesi asking questions about the cheque’s origin.
mr. mandarino
testified that lavorato told him he had a friend who “wanted to participate in
what we were doing with the cheques. it was all the same arrangement,
agreement. i made sure to tell peter to…communicate to giovanni to do the same
thing with, you know, we’re going to hold income tax, we’re going to hold hst;
it all has to be remitted properly. and all this was done through peter. i did
not do this directly with giovanni.
i am satisfied that
this utterance is admissible against mr. imbesi under the three-part
test in
r.
v. carter
,
1982 canlii 35 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 938
. i am satisfied there was a common criminal
enterprise between mr. mandarino and mr. lavorato to fraudulently obtain funds
from mr. mandarino’s employer. mr. imbesi became part of the common enterprise.
he knowingly and dishonestly received a cheque from walsh construction. his
expression of interest in joining the criminal enterprise was in furtherance of
the criminal enterprise. this statement is presumptively admissible and
presumptively satisfies the requirements of necessity and reliability. there is
no other potential source for the evidence and is therefore necessary. i am
satisfied that mandarino’s evidence with respect to this alleged conversation
between mr. mandarino and mr. lavorato is reliable.
mr. lavorato
testified that he told mr. imbesi that mandarino “had a couple of side jobs
going and needed to pay his guys cash and he would give him something for doing
the favour”. there is no evidence that mr. imbesi made any inquiry with respect
to why the cheque needed to be cashed through him or through imbesi’s business
account rather than his personal account.
mr. lavorato
testified that as per his instructions from mandarino, he also told imbesi to
remit income tax and hst even though the cheque did not represent income or the
provision of goods or services. i am satisfied that this was done to make the
transaction seem legitimate. i agree with the crown’s submission that the
request to remit false amounts to the cra would have been highly suspicious to
mr. imbesi and should have necessitated further inquiry. i am satisfied that
mr. imbesi was, at the very least, wilfully blind to the fraudulent nature of
the $120,921.30.
i accept mr.
lavorato’s evidence as true that he had no recollection of mr. imbesi asking
him about the source of the funds from the cheque, the fact that there was a
business address in chicago and above all why it was necessary to make income
tax and hst remittances.
there is a
compelling body of circumstantial evidence that leads the court to infer that
mr. imbesi was, at the very least, wilfully blind to the fraudulent nature of
the funds he received from walsh:
- imbesi’s
company, gbsi, had no contractual relationship with walsh construction.
- he
performed no work, provided no goods or services, and had no prior dealings
with the company.
- the
cheque issued to gbsi was for $120,921.30, a significant amount and warranted
further inquiry
- the
cheque was issued by wcc construction canada ulc, with a chicago address and
signed by 'timothy'.
- mr. imbesi
did not inquire about the source of the funds or the legitimacy of the
transaction.
- mr
imbesi remitted hst and income tax on funds for which no services were
rendered. as in the case of mr. lavorato, i am satisfied that these remittances
were done to create a false appearance of legitimacy. this system of remitting
hst and income tax should have been highly suspicious to mr. imbesi.
- mr. imbesi
was financially vulnerable and likely to accept funds without asking questions.
- all
instructions and coordination regarding the cheque were relayed through mr. lavorato.
-  mr. mandarino
testified that he never dealt directly with imbesi regarding the cheque.
the evidence falls
short of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. imbesi had actual knowledge
of the fraud. however, the evidence is clear that mr. imbesi ignored obvious
signs of illegitimacy, failed to ask basic questions and benefitted from the
transaction to the financial detriment of walsh construction.
i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. imbesi’s knowledge of the fraud is imputed through
the doctrine of wilful blindness. he is also guilty of fraud.
mr. lavorato and
mr. imbesi are found guilty as charged.
released:
september 26, 2025
justice t. lipson