citation:
r.
v. jackson
, 2025 oncj 617
date:  november 25, 2025
ontario
court of justice
toronto
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and  —
matthew jackson
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
the crown
m. cuda, c. sheppard and a. kwan
for
the defendant
c.
zeeh
heard:
january 8-10; june 11-12;
august 6, 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction
mr. jackson is charged with 25 firearm-related
possession charges arising out of the execution of a search warrant at his home
on may 7, 2024.
mr. zeeh, counsel for the defendant, brought
a
charter
challenge to the admissibility of the evidence seized pursuant
to the execution of the warrant.  that challenge was dismissed with reasons to
follow. the reasons for that decision are set out below.
a trial followed the unsuccessful
charter
challenge during which mr. jackson admitted to being in possession of the many contraband
items found in his home on may 7, 2024, but testified that he possessed these
items under duress and was thus not guilty of the alleged offences.
b.
the
charter application
(a)
introduction
on may 6, 2024, the police sought
authorization to search the applicant’s “dwelling house (1007-80 marine parade
drive, toronto), and red dodge charger
hellcat
ontario license dbby 174”
for firearms and firearm-related items. a warrant to search was issued.
on may 7, 2024, after a tense standoff with
the police, the applicant was arrested during the execution of the search
warrant. in the residence, the police located several firearms, several
different firearm accessories, and a large amount of ammunition.
the applicant/defendant brought a
charter
application alleging that the police breached his ss. 7 and 8
charter
rights. he alleged that the affiant failed in his duty to be full, frank and
fair, and the affidavit drafted (ito) was purposely misleading. he also argued
that the ito did not provide a sufficient basis upon which the issuing justice
could have found that reasonable grounds existed to issue the warrant. the
applicant sought the exclusion of the evidence seized from 1007-80 marine
parade drive in toronto.
the applicant also sought to cross-examine
the affiant on several alleged misstatements and misleading statements in the
ito.
i permitted limited cross-examination of the
affiant but dismissed the
charter
application to exclude the fruits of
the search for the reasons that follow.
(b)
cross-examination of the affiant
the applicant pointed out that the evidence
clearly supported the notion that the applicant’s car was a dodge charger “scat
pack” and not a “hellcat”. yet, as the applicant pointed out, the affiant
refers to the applicant’s car as a hellcat on many occasions in the ito. the
applicant argued that this mischaracterization was significant and nefarious
and might support an argument that the affiant had knowingly misled the issuing
justice. evidence that the applicant owned a hellcat would have gone some
distance in associating the applicant with a photo that the police had obtained
of someone holding a hellcat pistol. i ruled that the test set out in
r. v.
pires
(2005),
2005 scc 66 (canlii)
, 201 c.c.c. (3d) 449 (s.c.c.) had been met and allowed
cross-examination of the affiant, detective constable jorge lee, only regarding
this discrepancy.
dc lee admitted that he had made several
errors in the ito where he swore that the applicant drove a hellcat and swore
that ministry of transportation records said as much.  he testified that he was
not overly familiar with the distinction between a hellcat and a scat pack and
that he had erroneously assumed the applicant’s car was a hellcat. dc lee
denied that he intentionally sought to mislead the issuing justice into
believing that the applicant drove a hellcat.
(c)
step 6
the ito as presented to the issuing justice
of the peace contained information supplied by a confidential source (cs). the
ito supplied to the applicant was redacted. as is common, with a view to
protecting the identity of the cs, much of the information supplied by the cs
was blacked out in the copy of the ito supplied to the defence.
the crown, relying on step 6 as explained in
r. v. garofoli
(1990),
1990 canlii 52 (scc)
,
60 c.c.c. (3d) 161 (s.c.c.
)
,
and following the procedure mandated in
r. v. crevier
,
2015 onca 619
, supplied
the court with an unredacted copy of the ito and a proposed judicial summary
for the applicant.
(d)
analysis
the applicant argued that dc lee had
resorted to deliberate deception and that i should find that he had acted in a
fashion intended to subvert the process and then exercise my discretion to
quash the warrant in its entirety pursuant to
r. v. paryniuk
, (2017),
2017 onca 87 (canlii)
, 347 c.c.c. (3d) 82 (ont. c.a.) where, at paragraph 69 the court of appeal for ontario
confirmed the power of a trial court to quash a warrant where the affiant had
acted in a fashion subversive of the process
.
i accepted dc lee’s testimony. i found that
his references to the applicant owning and driving a hellcat were innocent
errors for which excision is the appropriate remedy. this case is
distinguishable from those relied on by the applicant, such as
r. v. nyadu
,
2024 onsc 4092
,
r. v. majeed
,
2017 onsc 2963
and
r. v. mackenzie
,
2024 oncj 472
.
the respondent conceded that the ito as
redacted to protect the cs privilege did not disclose reasonable and probable
grounds for the issuance of the warrant.
the cs privilege prevents me from going into
detail but, upon consideration of the unredacted ito pursuant to step 6, i am
satisfied that the information supplied by the cs predicting the commission of
a criminal offence was sufficiently detailed and current to be compelling and
credible. this information was, to a significant degree, corroborated by police
investigation prior to making the decision to conduct the search.
r. v.
debot
(1989),
1989 canlii 13 (scc)
, 52 c.c.c. (3d) 193 (s.c.c.) at p. 215.
after excision,
the unredacted
ito provided an ample basis upon which the issuing justice could have found
that reasonable grounds existed to issue the warrant
.
r. v. vu
,
2013
scc 60
(e)
conclusion
the
charter
application was dismissed.
the evidence found upon execution of the warrant was admitted.
c.
the
trial
(a)
introduction
the crown’s case consisted of a lengthy
agreed statement of fact with several photo and video attachments.
the defendant testified but called no
further evidence.
(b)
the agreed statement of fact and exhibits
filed
the critical portions of the text of the
agreed statement of fact read as follows, with minor editorial alterations:
on
may 7, 2024, at about 6:10am the tps emergency task force (“etf”) attended the
10th floor of 80 marine parade drive, toronto, to execute a search warrant on
unit 1007. they announced “police search warrant” three times when they arrived
at the door to unit 1007.
police
constable (“pc”) harding #5467 defeated the lock on the front door of the unit.
he tried to open the door and observed jackson pushing on the door from inside.
pc harding forced the door open and saw jackson run down the hallway to the
room on the left side of the unit. when pc harding observed jackson, he voiced
out “contact”.
the
room jackson entered was his bedroom. the entrance to the balcony of the unit
was off his bedroom.
jackson refused to exit his bedroom
and demanded a negotiator.
pc
allawaneh #11019 was a member of the etf team and a negotiator. he began
communicating with jackson and instructed him to surrender. jackson refused. he
indicated he was armed. at this time police were not able to visually observe
jackson.
police
advised jackson they had a
criminal code
search warrant authorizing a
search of his residence. jackson said he had a gun to protect himself and that
he wasn’t going back to jail. jackson indicated the gun he had was an ar-15
rifle.
between
6:10am and 6:25am detective (“det”) storey received information that jackson
was posting videos on instagram. jackson’s cat and a firearm were depicted in
the video, and he could be heard talking to etf members in it.
at
about 6:33am a police drone began making some observations of jackson in his
room.
pc
allawaneh and jackson continued to negotiate. jackson indicated his sister was
messaging him. jackson spoke about his cat being safe and requested his sister
be permitted to retrieve the cat. jackson indicated he was going to call his
lawyer.
at
about 6:40am the neighbours in the units on the left and right side of
jackson’s unit were evacuated by police.
dc
pak #8574 checked jackson’s instagram account of @krucifix_14. it was an open
account, so anyone with instagram could access it. he observed two stories in
the new/unviewed section of jackson’s instagram. the first story depicted a
rifle type firearm on the bed next to a set of legs and a hairless cat. the
second story appeared to be the same with a caption “police stand off great”
and a thumbs up emoji.
at
about 6:54am dc lee #9146 viewed jackson’s instagram account krucifix_14
(formerly bxnd_master). he made notes respecting the contents of the two videos
and contacted the tps c3 unit to capture the evidence associated to jackson’s
account.
at
about 6:56am dc pak took a screen shot of jackson’s instagram video depicting
the firearm to show the etf. as indicated, during the standoff with police
jackson posted videos on his instagram account, @krucifix_14. he recorded a
portion of the standoff. the video begins with a depiction of an ar-15. the
safety was in the “fire” position.
in
the video jackson can be heard saying, “… no, i’m not trying to contact my
lawyer officer, i’m just waiting for him to text me back.” jackson then pointed
the camera towards the partially open door of his room in the direction of the
front door of his residence. a similar video was posted to the @krucifix_14
instagram account.
during
the standoff with police jackson said he had multiple guns. he said they
included a glock with a “switch”, another glock with a red dot, an ar-15 with a
drum magazine, and a thousand rounds of ammunition or more.
at
about 7:00am sergeant (“sgt”) lefort #8411, the officer in charge of the
initial etf team, attempted to call jackson’s sister. jackson indicated he
wanted to say goodbye to her before surrendering himself.
at
about 7:20am sgt lefort spoke to his colleague, sgt arulanandam #5414. he requested
sgt arulanandam’s etf team to attend to help.
at
around 7:30am det storey was advised jackson continued to refuse to surrender.
jackson told police he wanted to see or speak to his sister, and he would give
her his cat.
around
this time jackson demanded his cat be turned over to his sister. he said this needed
to occur before he would surrender. jackson provided his sister’s first name
and phone number. at about 7:50am sgt lefort called the number jackson provided
for his sister. she did not answer.
at
about 8:02am a uniform officer, pc ashkar #8819, attended the 10
th
floor of 80 marine parade drive.
he stood in the hallway outside of unit 1007 and recorded the negotiations on
his body worn camera. he did this from about 8:02am to 8:13am
and again from about 8:25am
to 9:37am.
at about 8:07am a psychologist attended
the 10
th
floor to
assist in negotiations.
at
about 8:15am a female believed to be jackson’s sister attended the lobby of 80
marine parade drive. at about 8:20am the female verbally identified as samantha
bird.
at
about 8:20am sgt lefort received information from etf that jackson said he was
feeling suicidal. jackson said he did not want to go back to jail. police decided
to stop making efforts to facilitate the transfer of jackson’s cat. jackson
refused to speak to the psychologist.
sgt
lefort obtained the first name and phone number of the lawyer jackson was
requesting to speak to. at about 8:42am det storey attempted to contact the
lawyer. he left a message. at about 8:44am he tried again and texted the lawyer’s
number requesting the lawyer call him.
det
storey received a call from jackson’s lawyer at about 8:50am. det storey
advised the lawyer jackson would be arrested for possession of a firearm. he
requested the lawyer speak to jackson and encourage him to surrender to police.
the lawyer said he had already spoken to jackson. the call ended at about
8:55am.
at about 8:51am police deployed a
robot into jackson’s condominium.
at
about 9:00am jackson spoke on the phone with the woman in the lobby, samantha.
he spoke to her again around 9:13am. jackson indicated to police he was
satisfied his sister would be able to leave with the cat after this
conversation. at about 9:19am jackson said he was going to put the cat in a bag
and slide it out to police.
at
about 9:24am jackson advised police he was speaking to his lawyer again.
at about 9:29am jackson slid the
bag with the cat in it towards police.
at
about 9:31am etf officers attended the lobby. they gave a backpack containing
jackson’s cat to the woman self-identifying as samantha. at about 9:44am the
woman left with jackson’s cat in an uber.
at
about 10:33am officers were able to make observations of jackson. an ar style
rifle was seen on the floor at the foot of jackson’s bed, within arms reach.
pc
allawaneh continued to negotiate with jackson until about 11:03am. by the end
of pc allawaneh’s negotiations with jackson, jackson was sitting at the
threshold of his bedroom door and facing the front door of his unit.
80
marine parade drive is a high-rise condominium. there are other high-rise
condominiums situated close by. officers were concerned about public and police
safety during the stand-off.
at
about 11:03am pc harding took over negotiations with jackson. eventually
jackson exited his bedroom. at about 11:30am pc harding entered jackson’s unit
and took him into custody.
det
storey took custody of jackson from pc harding. he placed jackson under arrest
for possession of a firearm and provided him rights to counsel. det storey
escorted jackson to the lobby of 80 marine parade drive and turned him over to
pc davey #9818 and pc lacuna #10835 at about 11:41am. the exchange was recorded
on a body worn camera.
the
transporting officers turned on the in-car camera of their squad car before
jackson entered. jackson advised the transporting officers of some medical
issues he believed he was having. the transporting officers took jackson to
paramedics where he was examined. part of jackson’s interactions with
paramedics was recorded on a body worn camera. at 11:55am the paramedics
medically cleared jackson.
jackson
was transported to tps 22 division. at about 12:35pm he was booked before the
booking sergeant. at about 12:50pm jackson was escorted to his cell. he was
mostly kept in the cell until after midnight on may 8, 2022.
at
about 2:14pm two investigators attended 22 division. they brought property
located during the search warrant execution at unit 1007 and placed it in
jackson’s general property. these items included jackson’s jewellery; a pocket
watch, gold chain with a diamond encrusted “snob mob” pendant, two gold diamond
encrusted teeth grills, and four earrings. another item was jackson’s keys and
a couple of key fobs. the last item was $5,950 cash, consisting of 21
one-hundred-dollar bills, 39 fifty-dollar bills, and 95 twenty-dollar bills.
jackson
and his property were transported to tps 23 division on may 8, 2022. at about
2:20am he was booked. afterward, he was placed in a cell. he mostly stayed in
the cell until about 8pm on may 8, 2022. he was then transported with his
property to the toronto south detention centre.
search warrant execution
at
about 11:30am investigators executed the search warrant on jackson’s unit. det
storey took entry videos of the apartment before police began searching. the
unit was a one-bedroom condominium. upon entering the unit there was an arcade
machine to the immediate left and straight ahead a hallway to the remainder of
the unit.
the
hallway opens into the living room and kitchen areas.
at the end of the entrance hallway
immediately to the right is the kitchen area.
at
the bottom of the unit on the righthand side is the living room area with a
table, couch, and television.
the bedroom is on the lefthand side
of the unit across from the living room.
on
the bed in jackson’s bedroom investigators located an ar15 rifle loaded with a
40-round magazine. this is a prohibited firearm.
the
bedroom closet is on the left side of the bedroom if facing into the room. the
closet door opens into the bedroom.
inside
a canvas bag hanging from the door handle of the closet was a loaded glock 43x
firearm with a laser sight. it is a prohibited firearm.
inside
the bedroom closet investigators located firearm paraphernalia and ammunition.
inside a green gucci box in a red shoppers drug mart bag investigators located
a glock magazine loaded with 17 rounds of 9mm ammunition, and a glock magazine
loaded with 31 rounds of 9mm ammunition.
in
a pink plastic rolling cabinet officers located a glock magazine loaded with 10
rounds of 9mm ammunition.
in
a camouflage colour “bape” backpack officers located a firearm holster, handgun
rail flashlight, and a selector switch to convert a firearm into an automatic
firearm.
in
a beige canvas bag located next to the camouflage “bape” backpack officers
located 2 over capacity magazines, 7 magazines, and a loader assist.
specifically, the seven magazines were as follows: four (4) magazines were 9mm
calibre handgun magazines pinned at 10 rounds, and two (2) magazines were 9mm
calibre handgun magazines pinned at 6 rounds. one magazine was not analyzed.
the two overcapacity magazines were as follows: one (1) blue 9mm ets magazine
with capacity for twelve (12) 9mm calibre rounds, and one (1) clear ets
magazine with capacity for nineteen (19) 9mm calibre rounds. the pins were
removed from both.
inside
a green dollarama bag in a red gym bag officers located a drum magazine loaded
with 60 rounds of .223 calibre ammunition. the gym bag also contained a rifle
strap and a plastic bag with 30 rounds of .223 ammunition.
underneath
the bed officers located a black leather gucci bag. it contained nine-hundred
and fifteen (915) rounds of 9 mm ammunition and a plastic bag with another
nineteen (19) rounds of 9mm ammunition.
officers
searched the couch in the living room and located a loaded glock 26 gen 5
firearm. it is a prohibited firearm. the glock had an auto-select switch on the
rear of the slide, which allowed it to function as a fully automatic firearm.
an additional magazine was located in the couch. it was loaded with 10 rounds
of ammunition.
in
the kitchen in the top left cupboard on the lower shelf officers located a
laser sight firearm attachment. in the cupboard above the kitchen sink officers
located two clear plastic bags with loose ammunition. one bag contained fifty
(50) rounds of 9mm ammunition and the other ninety-nine (99) rounds of 9mm
ammunition.
on
the lower shelf of the cupboard on the right side of the dishwasher officers
located firearm holsters and firearm tools.
1007-80 marine parade drive
matthew
jackson was the sole tenant on the standard form lease associated to unit 1007,
80 marine parade drive, toronto. his tenancy began on august 12, 2023, and was
scheduled to end on august 31, 2024. the parking spot associated to the unit
was p4-29. jackson’s email listed on the agreement was
krucifix14@hotmail.com
firearms and associated paraphernalia
jackson
had knowledge of and control over the three firearms outlined in this agreed
statement of fact.
jackson
had knowledge of and control over the firearms paraphernalia detailed in this
agreed statement of fact. without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
this included firearm magazines, ammunition, attachments, holsters, auto-select
switches, straps, ammunition loaders, and tools.
all
ammunition, magazines, and prohibited devices seized at the search warrant were
tested by tps. they all functioned as designed and meet the
section 84
criminal code
definitions of ammunition, cartridge magazine, and prohibited
device.
the
ar-15 rifle of unknown make and model loaded with 40 rounds of ammunition is a
prohibited firearm.
it
did not have a serial number. it was test fired with ammunition located in unit
1007 and fired properly. this item was located on the bed in the bedroom.
the 40 round magazine attached to
the ar-15 is a prohibited device.
the
glock 43x, 9mm firearm loaded with 19 rounds of ammunition is a prohibited
firearm.
it was
test fired with ammunition located in unit 1007 and fired properly.
this item was located in a
beige canvas bag hanging from the bedroom closet door handle.
the
19 round detachable box cartridge magazine attached to the glock 43x is a
prohibited device.
the
glock 26 gen 5, 9mm firearm loaded with 10 rounds of ammunition is a prohibited
firearm. it was test fired with ammunition located in unit 1007 and fired
properly. this item was located in the couch cushions in the living room.
another magazine loaded with 10 rounds of ammunition was located in the couch
cushions.
the
auto-selector switch attached to the glock 26 gen 5 is a prohibited device.
the
detachable box cartridge magazine capable of holding 31 cartridges of 9mm luger
ammunition is a prohibited device. it was located in the bedroom closet in a
green gucci box inside a shoppers bag.
the
detachable box cartridge magazine capable of holding 17 cartridges of 9mm luger
ammunition is a prohibited device. it was also located in the bedroom closet in
a green gucci box inside a shoppers bag.
the
detachable drum magazine capable of holding 60 cartridges of .223 rem
ammunition is a prohibited device. it was located in the bedroom closet in a
green dollarama bag inside a red gym bag.
the
detachable box cartridge magazine capable of holding 12 cartridges of 9mm luger
ammunition is a prohibited device. it was located in the bedroom closet in a
beige cloth bag.
the
detachable box cartridge magazine capable of holding 19 cartridges of 9mm luger
ammunition is a prohibited device. it was located in the bedroom closet in a
beige clothe bag.
another
detachable box cartridge magazine was located in the beige cloth bag in the
closet. it was not included on the certificate of analyst.
the
machine gun conversion device capable of converting a semi-automatic firearm
into an automatic firearm is a prohibited device. it was located in the bedroom
closet in a camouflage green “bape” backpack.
pursuant
to a s. 109 order jackson was prohibited from possessing any prohibited
devices, which includes the over-capacity magazines seized by police.
pursuant
to a s. 109 order jackson was prohibited from possessing any ammunition, which
includes the ammunition seized by police.
officers
located the following ammunition (not including the ammunition found in
firearms and magazines):
i.
in the bedroom closet in a green dollarama bag with a drum magazine – a clear
ziploc baggie with thirty (30) .223 calibre rounds of ammunition.
ii
in a black shoppers canvas bag inside the gucci bag under the bed – nine
hundred and fifteen (915) rounds of 9mm ammunition. in addition, there was a
clear ziploc baggie with nineteen (19) rounds of 9mm ammunition. (total: 934
rounds of 9mm calibre ammunition)
iii. one loose round of .380
calibre ammunition in the dishwasher.
iv. one loose round of .40 calibre
ammunition in a scarface glass.
v.
in two clear ziploc baggies in a cupboard above the kitchen sink – fifty (50)
rounds of 9mm calibre ammunition and ninety-nine (99) rounds of 9mm calibre
ammunition. (total: 149 rounds of 9mm calibre ammunition).
jackson
possessed the ammunition for the purpose of transferring it to another.
authorization / licence and
certificates
on
may 7, 2024, jackson was not the holder of an authorization or licence to possess
a firearm in any place, and he knew this.
on
may 7, 2024, jackson did not have registration certificates for any firearm he
possessed, and he knew this.
summary
the
tps etf executed a search warrant at unit 1007, 80 marine parade drive, at
about 6:10am. a stand-off between police and jackson ensued until his arrest at
about 11:30am.
after the standoff was over jackson
cooperated with police.
an
itemized list of other evidence outlined in this agreed statement (without
limiting the generality above and not including the firearms paraphernalia) is
as follows:
i.
ar15 rifle loaded with 40 rounds of .223 calibre ammunition (bed)
ii.
glock 43x handgun loaded with 19 rounds of 9mm ammunition (canvas bag hanging
on door handle of bedroom closet)
iii.
glock 26 gen5 handgun loaded with 10 rounds of 9mm calibre ammunition with an
installed attachment permitting fully automatic capabilities (couch)
iv.
one (1) 9mm magazine loaded with 10 rounds of 9mm calibre ammunition (couch)
v.
two (2) loaded overcapacity 9mm magazines, one loaded with 17 rounds of 9mm
ammunition and the other with 31 rounds of 9mm ammunition (bedroom closet, in
shoppers bag inside a green gucci box)
vi.
one (1) 9mm magazine loaded with 10 rounds of ammunition (bedroom closet in a
pink plastic rolling cabinet)
vii. seven (7) 9mm magazines not
loaded (bedroom closet, beige cloth bag)
viii.
two (2) overcapacity 9mm magazines not loaded (bedroom closet, beige cloth bag
– one 12 capacity and the other 19 capacity)
ix.
one (1) drum magazine loaded with 60 rounds of .223 ammunition (bedroom closet,
in green dollarama bag inside gym bag)
x.
one (1) selector switch capable of converting a semi-automatic handgun into a
fully automatic handgun (bedroom closet, camouflage bape backpack).
the agreed statement of fact is accompanied
by many photos taken at the time of the execution of the search warrant, one of
which shows a glock poster hanging on a closet door in the defendant’s bedroom.
(c)
mr. jackson’s testimony in chief
mr. jackson testified over the course of two
days. a transcript of his testimony is available. i shall set out the salient aspects
of his testimony with emphasis on those that pertain to his defence of duress.
mr. jackson was 38 years old when he
testified. he is the father of one child. his criminal record begins with a
theft conviction in 2005 and contains convictions in 2009 for drug trafficking
and unlawful possession of firearms as well as convictions in 2018 for firearms
possession and trafficking in firearms. both the 2009 and 2018 convictions
resulted in significant custodial sentences.
after ultimately being released on parole in
2021 the defendant found work as a jewelry designer for a company known as sam
and tony’s. he took up residence in an apartment on yonge street, close to his
work. he was earning between $10,000 and $15,000 per month.
around february 2022, the defendant allowed
a man named john cruz-barros, whom he had met at the toronto south detention
centre between 2014 and 2017, to come and stay at his apartment for a night.
the next morning the defendant woke up to mr. cruz-barros letting two other men
armed with guns into his apartment. the guns had large, conspicuous 30-round
magazines. the defendant knew who they were. one of them went by the name of
big 13. they assaulted him until he bled.
the men searched his residence and stole
$3,000 in cash and $50,000 worth of jewelry as well as the defendant’s bank
card and cell phone. after approximately 40 minutes, they escorted him out of
his building past the concierge, into a waiting car that had been left running
on yonge street with no occupant. there was no one else in the lobby. once
outside the building the defendant did not cry out for help, although he would
have had he seen any police officers.
the men asked for the defendant’s banking
credentials and he told them he had no money in the bank. they threatened him
and told him he would have to find someone who could give him money, or they
would kill him.
the defendant was given back his phone so he
could contact such people. he found someone named stacks from whom he had often
bought marijuana who agreed to lend the defendant $3,000 and they went to stacks’
residence to pick up the money. the men wanted a further $15,000. the defendant
then called a man he knew as bizzy benz for more money. bizzy benz used to sell
marijuana to the defendant and the mother of the defendant’s son. the defendant
had met him in or around 2010. around the time of the kidnapping benz would
sometimes come by and purchase items at the jewelry store where the defendant
was working. they would sometimes smoke marijuana together on the sidewalk.
according to the defendant, benz’s real name was tyson or tyshon.
he told benz he urgently needed $15,000.
they argued a bit but eventually the defendant convinced him to lend him some
money and benz offered $13,800. the kidnappers then drove to mississauga with
the defendant to meet benz.
benz gave the defendant some money which he
then gave to the kidnappers who counted it and said it was $13,000.
the kidnappers then drove back to toronto
with the defendant. the men stopped the car, abandoned it and walked away with
the money and property from the defendant’s apartment. the defendant ran off
and got on the subway and returned home. he never saw the kidnappers again
although they continued to threaten and taunt him online. they were also threatening
his boss. the next day the defendant packed his things and moved to a motel near
highway 427 and dundas. he did not return to work. he did not think about
calling the police.
in august of 2022 he paid $2,000 to benz.
benz came to where the defendant was living to pick up the money. benz was
unhappy and produced a firearm. he told the defendant that he should sell his
car to satisfy the debt. later that month the defendant sold his car to a
company called leccos but had to wait a year for payment and only received
$4,800. the defendant did not call police. he gave this money to benz as soon
as he received it in july of 2023. benz was still upset with the delay in
repayment and told the defendant he was lucky to be alive and that benz had
once slashed someone’s throat over a pound of weed. he also told the defendant that
if he didn’t pay his debt or went to the police he would “pop off on” (use a
gun on) the mother of the defendant’s child.
benz then convinced the defendant to rent a
storage container and store items for benz. this would be a way to work off his
debt to benz. the defendant then helped benz transfer four large cardboard boxes
into the defendant’s unit along with a pink gym bag. the defendant believed the
pink bag contained firearms. the defendant told benz that it was a bad idea for
the defendant to store guns in his space given that the defendant had a
criminal record. benz told the defendant that it was better to store firearms
than be killed by one. samantha helped the defendant pay for his storage unit.
the defendant, with benz’s permission,
cancelled the storage unit within a month, sometime in august 2023. the
defendant had recently been accepted to rent a new condo unit at 80 marine
parade. he was getting financial assistance from his friend, samantha. he also
accepted a new job at complete jewelry. his boss was named zereh.
at this juncture the defendant believed he
still owed benz just over $4,000. he had been making small periodic payments to
him. the defendant’s life was returning to normal.
in february or march 2024, the defendant next
met with benz in a car to pay him a further $2,800. benz had a gun with him.
when the defendant asked if they would be “good” once the debt was paid off
benz got angry and told the defendant that he, benz, was the boss. benz punched
the defendant several times and told him to hand over his house keys and
building entry fob. the defendant complied. benz said he would be storing some
things at the defendant’s apartment until the debt was paid off.
the defendant then returned on foot to his
building and got the security guard to let him in. he then changed the lock on
his apartment door. he arranged to give benz a copy of the new key.
thereafter, benz was accessing the
defendant’s unit often. he would often message the defendant on snapchat and
tell him to leave the apartment. sometimes the defendant helped benz with the
items he was bringing to the apartment. the pink bag was one of those items and
the defendant again assumed it contained firearms.
on one occasion in mid-march the defendant
saw benz remove a handgun from the pink bag and then leave. he assumed benz
left to sell the gun.
on one accession in late april benz
instructed the defendant to meet him downstairs. benz gave the defendant a bag
full of bullets. the defendant put this bag under his bed. he felt compelled to
cooperate since benz was an armed gang member and had threatened him and his
son’s mother. benz knew where they lived.
the defendant thought about going to the
police, but he feared they would charge him with possession of the guns in his
apartment. he didn’t tell his son’s mother for fear she would be defiant and
not take his advice on how to protect herself, such as leaving the city.
the $4,000 that was seized by police at the
time of the execution of the search warrant was earmarked for benz and, in the
defendant’s opinion, would have extinguished the debt to benz. the defendant
had only recently received it, and he had told benz that he had it but the raid
on his apartment took place before payment had been arranged.
the defendant was hopeful that benz would
remove the contraband after being paid but he nonetheless feared that benz
would continue to threaten and extort him.
(d)
the text message
the defendant identified as a screenshot
from his phone of part of one of several text message conversations between who
he says are him and benz. the screenshot shows the date of “april 13, 2024”
displayed under only one of the messages. one of the accounts is labeled at the
top of the page as “b”. the other participant is unnamed. the defendant said
that he had saved benz’s contact as “b”.
according to the defendant, the text
conversation is between him and benz and reads as follows:
jackson
: alright yo. i really can’t stay here much longer
april 13, 2024 at
8:03 pm
jackson
: i’ll have $2,000 owed next 3 weeks tops, can you
please take your stuff out of my spot?
benz
: when will you have the 2k?
jackson
: soon as i finish the customers pendant 2-3 weeks, so
can you plz be ready to take your stuff?
benz
: 4k and we can chat about all that shit! i’ll be at
your place in a few days make sure you’re home
jackson
: bro plz don’t add to my debt this situation is
ruining my life. i’m sorry it took so long to pay you
benz
: run me my fucking 4k lucky i only want 4kc cause i
should do a lot worse to you kid
jackson
: okay i’ll get it but please i need this stuff out of
my place asap
read
2:39 pm
benz
:  lol don’t message me here hit me on snap
(e)
cross-examination of mr. jackson
about a week before the execution of the
search warrant benz instructed the defendant to take a glock 26 out of the pink
bag he was storing in the apartment and to put it and some bullets into a
cupboard in the kitchen. he did so and while doing so noticed that the bag contained
other firearms.
the glock poster that the defendant hung in
his room came from among benz’s items. he “foolishly” hung it up in his room because
he “enjoyed it”.
the rent at 80 marine parade drive was
$2,395 per month plus utilities. the defendant paid $3,600 at around the time
he moved in in august 2023. he relied on his friend samantha to help him with
his expenses at the time.
in 2019, upon his initial release from the
penitentiary, the defendant had $120,000 from an inheritance, $48,000 of which
he invested in the jewelry business. he also had other expenses including child
support of about $15,000, lawyer fees of about $7,000 and $4,000 he paid on old
parking infractions. he was earning about $2,400 per month at premier auto. he
then transitioned to his jewelry design job at sam and tony’s in the summer of
2019.
the defendant lost his parole in march of
2020 and was re-incarcerated for approximately 12 months.
the defendant admitted that he could have
got in benz’s car when he came with money for the kidnappers but at the time he
felt it was too dangerous and he had been warned by the kidnappers not to do
so.
on february 9, 2024, the defendant purchased
a 2021 dodge charger scat pack for $82,893 after taxes. he put $9,999 down in
cash and, along with samantha, financed the rest. he and samantha undertook to
pay $584.19 every two weeks. he made most of his half of the payments. the car
was still in the defendant’s possession on the day of his arrest.
the day before his arrest the defendant had
purchased a $250 fireplace. he didn’t put that money towards his debt to benz
because he had enough cash to cover that. he was hoping to pay benz within the
next day or two.
the defendant had received a “snob mob”
pendant worth $3,000 - $6,000 many months prior to his arrest. he never sold it
to finance his debt to benz because the only person who was in a position to
buy it was the person who had gifted it to him and the defendant did not want
to appear unappreciative and disrespectful.
the defendant identified an image from his
instagram account that showed him posing on his car with a large amount of
cash. he testified that this photo was from 2019.
he also identified an instagram photo of
himself in his marine parade drive apartment holding approximately $1,000 in
cash which he testified was probably his rent money.
he identified other photos of him posing
with his car and $6,300 in cash that he testified was the same money seized
from his apartment by the police.
according to the defendant he tried to
project an image on social media that exaggerated his wealth.
during the police standoff the defendant
posted videos of the encounter on social media. he was in shock and expected to
be killed.
the defendant testified that much of the
handgun paraphernalia found by police in the defendant’s bedroom on the day of
the raid originated in benz’s pink bag which the defendant emptied during the
police standoff.
other handgun paraphernalia were found in
the kitchen. they were never mentioned by the defendant earlier in his
testimony as items he had earlier transferred to the kitchen at the request of benz.
he denied placing those items in the kitchen and surmised that benz must have
come to his apartment when he wasn’t there and put them there himself.
a handgun was found by police in a canvas
bag hanging on the door of the defendant’s bedroom closet. the defendant
testified that it was not his and that he removed it from the pink bag and put
it there to hide it from police during the standoff. the gun had been fitted
with a laser sight, the empty box for which was found in the kitchen. the
defendant denied having installed the laser sight.
(f)
the law concerning the defence of duress
the defence of duress, whether it arises at
common law or as of statutory right, consists of the following elements, as set
out in
r
.
v
.
ryan
:
a.
there must be an explicit or
implicit threat of present or future death or bodily harm. the threat may be
directed at the accused or at a third party.
b. the accused must
reasonably believe that the threat will be carried out.
c.
there must be no safe avenue of escape. this is assessed on a modified
objective standard, taking into account what a reasonable person in the
accused’s circumstances would perceive and do.
d.
there must be a close temporal connection between the threat and the harm
threatened.
e.
there must be proportionality between the harm threatened and the harm
inflicted by the accused. the harm caused must be equal to or no greater than
the harm threatened. this element is also assessed on a modified objective
standard.
f. the accused must not be a party to a conspiracy or
association whereby they were subject to compulsion and actually knew that
threats or coercion to commit offences were a possible consequence of their
involvement.
r. v. ryan
,
2013 scc 3
at
paras.
81-84
if the defence is available at law and there
is an air of reality to all the essential elements on the evidence, the accused
is entitled to an acquittal unless the crown disproves one or more of the
essential elements of the defence beyond a reasonable doubt.
the air of reality test requires there be evidence
which, if believed, a properly instructed jury acting reasonably could acquit
r. v. richer
,
2025 onca 439
.
for no safe avenue of escape, one of the
main issues in the present case, it is to be determined on an objective
standard and adjusted for subjective circumstances. the accused’s asserted
belief that they lacked a reasonable alternative is not sufficient, standing
alone, to give an air of reality to the defence. the question is whether a reasonable
person, with a similar personal history, background, abilities, capacities, and
human frailties, would reasonably believe, in the particular circumstances,
that there was no safe avenue of escape.
r. v. m. (d.b.)
,
2016 onca 264
.
(g)
is there an air of reality to the defence of
duress?
when determining whether the air of reality
test is met, and thus whether the defence of duress can be asserted, i must
proceed on the basis that the testimony of the defendant is true.
there were two principal avenues of escape
available to the defendant. he could have paid off his debt to benz or go to
the police.
the evidence makes clear that both avenues
were available to the defendant, yet he availed himself of neither one. over
the year that the defendant stored guns on behalf of benz the defendant had
access to funds that he could have used to extinguish his debt. instead, he
rented an expensive condo and purchased an expensive car. nor did the defendant
contact the authorities or seek any advice on his predicament.
the defendant’s situation is not materially
different from that of the accused in
r. v m. (d.b.),
2016 onca 264
where the accused was indebted to a “mr. x” for about $40,000 he had borrowed.
he was unable to repay the debt. mr. x threatened the accused and his family if
he was unable to pay. mr. x proposed the accused work off the debt by making
deliveries and pick-ups of drugs. the accused agreed. he was apprehended by
police on about his ninth pick-up/delivery with seven pounds of cannabis in his
vehicle. the trial judge found there was no air of reality to duress. the judge
was not satisfied the accused could not pay the debt, and, he could have gone
to the police. the trial judge found the accused could have liquidated his
rrsps to repay the debt or could have gone to police. thus, duress had no air
of reality. the court of appeal upheld the trial judge’s decision. see too
r.
v. keller
,
a.j. no. 1257 (alta. c.a.)
.
mr. jackson has not met the air of reality
threshold.
(h)
if there were an air of reality to the
defence, would it succeed?
even if the defendant had met the air of
reality threshold, i would nonetheless have found that the crown had disproved
duress beyond a reasonable doubt.
the defendant’s
testimony to the effect that he was storing benz’s weaponry against his will is
belied by the degree to which the firearms and paraphernalia were distributed
throughout the apartment when the police searched the premises. guns, the
details of which the defendant said he knew nothing about, were found outside
the pink bag the defendant said he’d been given by benz.  two of them had been
altered and the empty boxes for the alteration kits were in the defendant’s
kitchen.
most tellingly,
there was a “glock” poster hanging on the defendant’s bedroom closet door. the
defendant testified that he removed this from benz’s pink bag, thought it
looked good, and hung it up.
i find that whether
or not the defendant received the various firearms in his apartment from benz,
the defendant was proudly and enthusiastically in possession of them, not under
duress as he testified.
that the defendant
did not extinguish the debt when he could have belies his assertion that he was
afraid of benz.
the defendant
referred to many third parties in his testimony. yet, no witnesses were called
who could have corroborated many aspects of his testimony, such as samantha,
who the defendant said helped him out financially, and his employers who he
said had received communications from his kidnappers. the mother of his son
could have testified as to the existence of bizzy benz. documents generated by
the various transactions the defendant referred to were not tendered. while
there is no onus on the defendant to prove duress, after an air of reality is
established, the absence of supporting evidence renders his account even less
plausible.
as concerns the
text message fragment that the defendant testified was one of several text
conversations with benz, without the other text messages between them, the unsupported
testimony of the defendant as to the meaning, timing and provenance of the text
fragment does not affect my finding regarding the defendant’s failure to make
out the necessary air of reality to the duress defence, nor would it have, in
the context of all the evidence raised a reasonable doubt as to duress.
ultimately, i do
not accept the defendant’s testimony to the effect that he was coerced by benz
to possess the firearms, ammunition and other contraband. nor does his testimony
along with the other evidence create a reasonable doubt concerning the defence
of duress.
d.
conclusion
mr. jackson is guilty on all counts.
released on november 25,
2025
justice
russell silverstein