ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dimillo
, 2025 oncj 142
date:
2025 03 14
court
file no.:  hamilton 998 23 47102956
between:
his
majesty the king
(applicant)
— and
—
frank dimillo
(respondent)
ruling
on hearsay applications
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on february 18-21, 26, 2025
reasons
released on march 14, 2025
sean doherty....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ian mccuaig............................................................ counsel
for the accused frank dimillo
garg j.:
i
overview
the accused allegedly shot the complainant in
the face. the complainant survived. the bullet is said to have passed through
his left cheek and out his neck. the alleged shooting occurred inside a trailer
parked at the accused’s residence.
the complainant testified. but he did not
incriminate the accused. he disavowed any knowledge of the shooting. he
disavowed any knowledge of the accused altogether. the complainant’s testimony
was in direct contrast to his police statement, in which he described the accused
shooting him.
the accused’s son, blake dimillo, also testified.
he acknowledged telling the police that he overheard the accused confess to the
shooting. but he testified that he misspoke and did not adopt that part of his
statement.
the crown applies to admit the hearsay statements
of the complainant and blake.
for the reasons that follow, i deny the application to admit the complainant’s
statement, and i grant the application to admit blake’s statement.
ii
general
principles
hearsay is an out-of-court statement tendered
for the truth of its contents. it is presumptively inadmissible. unlike trial
testimony, hearsay statements lack cross-examination that is contemporaneous to
the making of the statement. allowing the trier of fact to consider hearsay can
compromise trial fairness and the trial’s truth-seeking function:
r. v.
bradshaw
,
2017 scc 35
at para.
20
. there is a fear that untested hearsay
evidence might be afforded more weight than it deserves:
r. v. khelawon
,
2006 scc 57
at para.
35
. despite these concerns, hearsay can be admitted
into evidence when the applicant establishes on a balance of probabilities the
necessity of adducing the statement and the statement’s threshold reliability:
bradshaw
at para.
23
.
threshold reliability is the primary issue on
this application. to gain admission, the statement must be sufficiently reliable
to overcome the hearsay dangers. threshold reliability can be shown by
establishing procedural reliability or substantive reliability. considering one
form of reliability does not preclude considering the other:
khelawon
at
para.
49
;
r. v. couture
,
2007 scc 28
at para.
80
. “[the] two approaches
to establishing threshold reliability may work in tandem”:
bradshaw
at
para.
32
.
procedural reliability requires adequate
substitutes for testing the truth and accuracy of the statement. traditional
safeguards include a video recording of the statement, the statement being made
under oath or solemn affirmation, and the declarant being warned about the
consequences of lying:
r. v. b.(k.g.)
,
1993 canlii 116 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 740 at 795-796.
some form of cross-examining the declarant is usually required:
bradshaw
at paras.
27-28
.
substantive reliability requires sufficient
circumstantial or evidentiary guarantees that the statement is inherently
trustworthy. relevant factors include the circumstances in which the statement
was made and evidence that corroborates the statement:
bradshaw
at
paras.
27, 30-31
. on this basis of reliability, “the contents of the hearsay
statement [is] so reliable that contemporaneous cross-examination of the
declarant would add little if anything to the process”:
khelawon
at
para.
49
.
iii
potential
corroborative evidence
corroborative evidence is relevant to
establishing substantive reliability. corroborative evidence must be
trustworthy. to be relied on, the evidence must corroborate material portions
of the hearsay statement. “[t]o overcome the hearsay dangers and establish
substantive reliability, corroborative evidence must show that the material
aspects of the statement are unlikely to change under cross-examination”:
bradshaw
at para.
47
.
below i outline the potential corroborative
evidence on this application. whether the evidence is indeed corroborative is
addressed later in these reasons.
a.
evidence of there being an incident on the
accused’s property
people saw the accused and the complainant together
on the accused’s property on may 12, 2023, which is the date and location of
the alleged shooting. a cab driver picked up the complainant from the property.
he received the fare call around 2:38pm. he observed that the complainant was
covering the left side of his face with what appeared to be a white cloth.
meanwhile, blake testified that he arrived home around 3:00pm. he saw the accused,
the complainant, the accused’s girlfriend chantel, and his grandmother sue ann.
he described them as “panicked” and “frantic”. blake also saw the complainant
holding his cheek with a white scarf wrapped around his head.
the police attended the property on the day of
the alleged shooting. they made limited observations that day. they saw that
the trailer doors were closed. they also saw a hose that was spewing water onto
a garden bed, apparently directed at some fresh dirt. blake turned off the hose
when he came home.
b.
evidence of there being a shooting inside the
trailer
the next day, the police executed a search
warrant inside the trailer where the alleged shooting occurred. the police saw what
appeared to be a bullet hole in the wall. they cut holes in the two sheets of
plywood and three pieces of styrofoam that made up the wall, without piercing
the trailer’s external shell. on the ground behind these materials, they
located a “full metal jacket” projectile.
the police also searched inside the home. when
searching the basement, they located a bag hidden on ductwork near the ceiling.
they found a .357 magnum revolver inside the bag. the projectile located behind
the trailer wall could have fired from the gun (i.e., the projectile was compatible
with the gun).
the police found a spent casing loose in the bag
with the gun. this casing could have housed the projectile that was found
behind the trailer wall.
c.
evidence of the accused being the shooter
the police sent the gun for testing at the
centre of forensic sciences (cfs). two dna profiles suitable for comparison were
located on the gun. a swab of the textured areas (i.e., the grip, hammer, and
button) detected the dna from one male, labelled as “str profile 2”. the accused
cannot be excluded as the source of this profile. the str dna results are
estimated to be greater than one trillion times more likely if str profile 2
originates from the accused than if it originates from an unknown person
unrelated to the accused. the cfs expert used plain language in his testimony:
“it’s essentially inconceivable to me that this dna profile, str profile 2,
would originate from anyone other than [the accused], including family members
… this is an unambiguous dna profile with information at all of the available
testing locations”.
the gun was found in the basement. the accused’s
bedroom was also in the basement.
the presence of the accused’s dna does not speak
to when the dna was deposited. the expert recognized that dna could
theoretically persist for years on the textured areas of the gun.
d.
evidence of the complainant being shot
the complainant approached officer libby on the
street the morning after the alleged shooting. he tried to get her attention
while she was busy diffusing an unrelated matter. once officer libby turned her
attention to the complainant, she noticed an injury on his left cheek that was
scabbed over and bleeding. as the complainant turned away, officer libby saw a
second injury below the angle of his left jaw. this wound was completely open,
and officer libby could see flesh. after some convincing, the complainant agreed
to attend the hospital, where he gave his statement.
the police photographed the complainant’s
injuries two days after the alleged shooting (see exhibit 2). the photos depict
two obvious wounds to the left side of the complainant’s face. the first is a
hole on his cheek; the second is a hole on his neck behind the ear. both wounds
are slightly inflamed. some swelling is visible.
the cfs swabbed flaked staining on the left side
of the gun. the swab detected blood and dna from at least two people, including
at least one male. the blood stain provided one dna profile suitable for
comparison, labelled as “str profile 1”. the complainant cannot be excluded as
the source of this profile. the str dna results are estimated to be greater
than one trillion times more likely if str profile 1 originates from the complainant
than if it originates from an unknown person unrelated to the complainant.
the cfs also found blood on a paper manual that
was somewhere in the trailer. the swab of the staining contained dna from two
people, including at least one male. the str dna results are estimated to be
greater than one trillion times more likely if the complainant contributed to
the mixture, and 660,000 times more likely if the accused was the other
contributor. the expert testified that it was more likely that the blood originated
from the complainant because he contributed more dna to the mixture.
the manual’s precise location within the trailer
at the time of the alleged shooting cannot be determined because items in the
trailer shifted considerably during towing. police did not take photographs of
the trailer’s contents until after the towing.
iv
admissibility
of the complainant’s statement
i conclude that the complainant’s hearsay statement
is inadmissible based on the following analysis.
a.
necessity
the complainant’s statement is necessary. while
the complainant attended court and took the oath, functionally he did not
testify. many of his answers were non-responsive. he denied making the
statement and therefore did not adopt its contents.
b.
procedural reliability
the crown points to the following circumstances
to establish procedural reliability: the statement was recorded, the complainant
knew he was being recorded, the police reminded the complainant to tell the
truth, and the complainant knew that his statement would be disclosed to the
accused. the complainant knew that his statement would give rise to criminal
charges and require him to testify. as he said in the statement, “i fully
intend to testify. i fully intend to put this guy on the cross”.
the evidence falls well short of establishing
procedural reliability. the factors in favour of procedural reliability do not
overcome the factors against. crucially, i find that the complainant is not
available for meaningful cross-examination: see
bradshaw
at
para.
28
. the truth and accuracy of the complainant’s statement cannot be
tested when he denies making the statement. the complainant also refused to answer
many questions or provided unintelligible responses. the complainant is only available
for cross-examination in the sense that he will sit in the witness stand and listen
to questions. but the opportunity for cross-examination in this case is
“illusory” and insufficient to overcome the hearsay dangers:
r. v.
youvarajah
,
2013 scc 41
at para.
41
.
i also accept defence counsel’s argument that i should
consider the complainant’s contemptuous attitude to the court process. ordinarily,
a declarant’s knowledge that their statement might be used in court adds
solemnity to the occasion and thus some reliability to the statement. but in
this case, even if the police had put the complainant under oath and warned him
about the consequences of lying, i am doubtful that these safeguards would have
bound the complainant’s conscience.
c.
substantive reliability
the crown focused its submissions on substantive
reliability and the force of the corroborative evidence. the supreme court’s
decision in
bradshaw
sets the structure of my analysis.
material aspects
of the hearsay statement
the complainant described how the accused shot
him in the face. he gave a detailed account. the complainant declared how the
accused shot him with a .357 magnum. he proffered a motive for the shooting. he
described how the accused had reproached him for stealing his drugs, money, and
gun. when the accused’s girlfriend said that she found the money in the
complainant’s bag, the accused snapped. he dragged the complainant into the
trailer,
put the gun to the complainant’s face, and pulled the trigger. the accused told
the complainant that the bullet hit the back of the trailer. after the shooting,
the accused tried to clean up the blood with water. the accused gave the
complainant a towel, which the complainant ripped in half. the complainant
eventually left and went to his mother’s place, taking the towel with him.
specific hearsay dangers
the complainant’s sincerity when giving his
statement is clearly at issue. there is a danger that the complainant was not
being truthful.
defence counsel argued that memory, narration, and
perception are live dangers as well. i agree, albeit to a lesser degree than
sincerity. counsel posited that the complainant told a fantastical story while
high on pain killers or opioids. there is evidentiary support for this
position. one would not expect a shooting victim to resist medical treatment
while munching on doughnuts and slurping an a&w soda, yet that is what the
police observed. while the complainant might have accurately recounted being shot,
i agree there is some question on whether he reliably recounted the details.
alternative explanations
for the statement
in assessing substantive reliability, i must
identify alternative and even speculative explanations for the hearsay
statement:
bradshaw
at para.
48
. with the assistance of counsel, i have
identified the following alternatives:
(1)
the complainant was shot or otherwise injured
before attending the trailer.
(2)
the complainant shot himself in the trailer.
(3)
someone other than the accused shot the
complainant in the trailer.
(4)
the accused shot the complainant in the trailer
by accident.
defence counsel recognized that the
complainant being shot from attempting suicide was not a viable alternative.
whether
corroborative evidence rules out the alternative explanations
i can only rely on corroborative evidence to
establish threshold reliability if it shows, when considered as a whole and in
the circumstances of the case, that the only likely explanation for the
statement is the complainant’s truthfulness and accuracy with respect to the
material aspects of the statement:
bradshaw
at paras.
40, 44, 47
. i must
be able to “rule out any plausible alternative explanations on a balance of
probabilities”: para. 49.
to be considered, corroborative evidence must
itself be trustworthy. all the potential corroborative evidence that i outlined
above is trustworthy. much of this evidence was uncontroversial or only lightly
challenged by the defence. instead, the defence added qualifiers to the
evidence or highlighted the limits of its corroborative force.
there is force to the crown’s argument that the
corroborative evidence establishes substantive reliability. that evidence comes
close to ruling out the alternative explanations. but ultimately, i am not
satisfied that the complainant’s statement is “so reliable that contemporaneous
cross-examination of [him] would add little if anything to the process”:
khelawon
at para.
49
. i cannot say that the only likely explanation is that the
statement is true:
bradshaw
at para.
31
.
i will start with the strengths of the
corroborative evidence. i find that it eliminates the plausibility of the complainant
being shot or injured elsewhere and then attending the trailer. i appreciate
that the complainant did not act as one might expect. he did not call 911 or rush
to the emergency room. still, it is implausible that the complainant was
injured by an apparent gunshot wound at an unknown location, somehow attended
the trailer while still bleeding from that wound, the gun was produced for some
unknown reason, the complainant bled on the gun, people on the property were
unsettled, and then the police found a bullet compatible with the gun implanted
in the wall shortly thereafter. in this context, i do not find it conflicting
that blake’s grandmother saw the complainant already in possession of the white
cloth before the alleged shooting. examined holistically, the corroborative
evidence entirely supports the complainant’s declaration that he was shot inside
the trailer on may 12, 2023.
the real issue is whether the evidence sufficiently
corroborates the truthfulness of the complainant’s statement that the accused
was the shooter. there is evidence that corroborates this material aspect of
the statement. only two dna profiles were found on the gun: one from the
complainant and one from the accused.
the accused’s dna is located where a person would ordinarily touch a gun when using
it as intended. the police then found the gun hidden in the same basement that
housed the accused’s bedroom. this corroborative evidence must be considered
alongside the evidence confirming that the shooting occurred in the trailer on may
12 because it creates a limited pool of people who could have fired the gun—the
accused amongst them.
the alternative that the accused shot himself with
the gun is not very compelling. the corroborative evidence establishes that the
complainant approached the police of his own volition to report the shooting. i
do not see why the complainant would have done that if he shot himself. defence
counsel argued that the complainant might have felt that he had no choice—that he
needed to explain his injury before the police investigated him. i do not
accept this argument. officer libby was unequivocal in her testimony that the
complainant tried to get her attention. he needed to be patient and wait until she
had wrapped up another matter. from my sense of the evidence, officer libby
would have had zero interest in the complainant but for his persistence. counsel
countered that the complainant might have wrongly perceived that the police
were interested in him.
the flaw in this argument is that it relies on the complainant perceiving his
circumstances irrationally but then making the rational decision of getting
ahead of the investigation by deflecting blame for the shooting. i cannot
accept this explanation for the complainant reporting the shooting.
nonetheless, the corroborative evidence does not
show that the only likely explanation for the complainant’s statement was his truthfulness
that the accused had shot him. the alternatives might not be compelling. but
they do not need to be. the corroborative evidence needs to rule out the
alternative explanations such that the only remaining likely explanation for
the statement is the complainant’s truthfulness and accuracy:
bradshaw
at paras.
57, 85
. i conclude that substantive reliability is not established for
the following four reasons.
first, the complainant is an unsavoury witness
as defined by
vetrovec v. the queen
,
1982 canlii 20 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 811. he cannot
be trusted to tell the truth. he has a long record for crimes of dishonesty and
offences against the administration of justice. there are some obvious
falsehoods in the statement (e.g., the complainant said that he had 53
bitcoins). i also implicitly found that the complainant lied to the court while
under oath.
establishing the inherent trustworthiness of hearsay evidence from an unsavoury
witness will be “extremely challenging”:
bradshaw
at para.
69
.
second, while it might be definitive that the
accused’s dna is on the gun, the corroborative evidence is not definitive on
when or how he deposited the dna. the expert agreed in cross-examination that
the accused’s dna could “theoretically” have persisted on the gun “for years”. the
expert also acknowledged that ordinary handling of the gun was not the only way
to deposit the dna.
third, i must consider evidence that conflicts
with the complainant’s statement:
bradshaw
at para.
30
. for example, the
complainant in his statement described how “there’s blood everywhere” after the
shooting and that the accused was using water to clean it up. the police, on
the day of the alleged shooting and the next day when executing the warrant, did
not see evidence of cleaning or copious amounts of blood. it is a stretch to
connect the running hose in the garden with the accused’s alleged efforts to
clean the scene. furthermore, the complainant told the police that the accused
robbed him. but the evidence does not disclose the police recovering any of his
effects from the property.
fourth, substantive reliability remains
concerned with the circumstances in which the statement was taken:
bradshaw
at para.
30
. the complainant had two gaping gunshot wounds. yet he did not
exhibit signs of pain or distress. defence counsel raises the valid inference
that the complainant was under the influence of drugs or strong medication when
giving his statement, which undermines its reliability.
taking these four reasons collectively, the
corroborative evidence does not exclude the alternative that the complainant
was shot by someone other than the accused. the complainant’s truthfulness and
accuracy provide a likely explanation for him implicating the accused. but i
cannot rule out the plausible alternative explanations on a balance of
probabilities:
bradshaw
at para.
49
.
v
admissibility of blake
dimillo’s statement
i conclude that the hearsay statement of the
accused’s son, blake, is admissible based on the following analysis.
a.
circumstances and content of the statement
i start with a detailed review of the evidence going
to the circumstances and content of blake’s statement. this context is relevant
to the procedural reliability of the statement, and defence counsel’s argument
that the probative value of the statement is surpassed by its prejudicial
effect.
blake discussed the alleged shooting
blake arrived home after the alleged shooting
and saw that people were unsettled. he talked about the incident with his aunt angie
on the telephone. at home, blake discussed the events with the accused’s
girlfriend chantel. she told blake an extensive account of what she thought had
happened. blake did not know how angie or chantel obtained their information.
blake testified that, after speaking with angie and chantel, he had developed a
fairly detailed picture of the day’s events.
circumstances leading to the statement
blake was home when the police came to execute
the search warrant the day after the alleged shooting. the police were reasonably polite and invited everyone to leave the
house. blake was only wearing gym shorts when he walked outside that spring
morning. he waited outside for about 15 to 20 minutes until he was put in a
detective’s car and brought to the station. it was blake’s first time in a
police car or at a police station. upon arriving at the station, the police
gave him coveralls to wear. he then waited in a room for up to two and a half
hours. he did not have access to speak with someone during this time. he
testified that no one told him that he was free to leave. he did apparently
drink water and use the washroom while he was waiting.
there is no evidence that he
required police permission or remained under police supervision during this waiting
period.
the officer started blake’s interview by
apologizing for keeping him waiting. the officer informed blake that the
statement would be recorded by video and audio. the officer told blake that he
was a witness, not in any trouble, not under arrest, not detained, and not
being investigated for any crime. the officer indicated that he anticipated a
quick chat and hoped to get him home quickly.
blake’s knowledge when giving the statement
blake testified that he was truthful with the
police. he understood that he “could get in trouble” if he lied to the police.
he also understood that lying could result in “something bad” happening to
someone else.
blake knew that the police were recording his statement. he knew that the
police were collecting witness accounts to be used as evidence, and he knew
that the police would use the statement in their investigation against the
accused. he knew that the police had come for the accused from the moment that they
arrived at his home.
material content
of the statement
i have reproduced the material content of the
statement based on what i can hear from listening to it:
blake:  … i went downstairs to ask [the
accused] like, just basically what the fuck is wrong with him? why is he
involving us? like, this isn’t, like, it’s not safe, obviously. but he was out.
so, i talked …
officer:  what time did that
[indiscernible] at roughly?
blake:  that was around 6:30. and that’s
when i talked to chantel. that’s when i found out from her. because she was
sleeping. but i woke her up. and i said like, i wanted to hear her point of
view. because i had angie’s. so i wanted to hear what was going on from her.
and then he came upstairs around, i wanna say eight o’clock, nine o’clock. and
he, um, he asked me if i knew what happened and i was like, yeah. i was like, what
do you want me to say? like, you’re a fucking idiot. like, if they question me,
like i’m gonna tell them the truth, type thing. and um, he, uh, he had a couple
friends come over. um, i don't know them, but it was just, it was just people.
um, i’m assuming he was trying to cover it up, trying to get things situated.
but i didn’t have any involvement in that. i didn’t leave my room, didn’t
really hear anything. i heard he told, he told someone about what happened. i
didn’t see the person, cause it’s hard to explain, cause you didn’t go inside,
but it's like when you come outta my room, you look in the kitchen at the back
door, there’s like a pillar. like the doorway. so i couldn’t see him,
but i could see my dad explaining it and i could hear …
officer:  what was he saying?
blake:  just saying that he shot him, like
he shot him in the face.
officer:  he was telling the person that he
shot him in the face.
blake:  yeah. i don’t know who the person
was, but he was telling someone. it was one of his friends.
officer:  was he like detailing what it,
what it, what had happened?
blake:  he said that he shot him in cheek,
went through and up through his ear. i don’t, he seemed kind of proud about it,
but that’s why i’m being completely truthful. i, it doesn’t [indiscernible] …
officer:  i can’t tell you how, how much we
appreciate, uh, you telling the truth. um, because it just makes it easier for
everybody. easier on you, easier on us. even ultimately easier on your dad in
the sense that you, you know, you’re not getting into these lies, trying to
spin stories or anything like that. i mean, it’s, it’s, it’s one of those
things where the truth is always gonna be the best, the best route, right?
blake:  he’s my dad. like, i get the whole
protecting, but there’s nothing to protect. like, this was just a very stupid
decision he made. and i knew that eventually he was gonna end up in jail or
dead. so i just, i’d rather him be in jail right, can at least still see him.
but, it is what it is.
blake appeared calm and coherent when speaking
to the police. he exhibited no signs of distress or discomfort. he freely
shared his account without pointed examination by the police.
the recantation
blake testified about the visitors that attended
his home during the evening after the alleged shooting. the visitors went to
the back porch with the accused. blake was in his bedroom at the time. he could
hear and see the accused speaking with the visitors through a closed kitchen window.
his bedroom was about ten feet from the kitchen, and the kitchen itself was
about eight or ten feet wide.
the accused was standing about a metre from the window.
when asked what the accused said, blake testified:
i heard his tone of voice. i could hear
mumbling and like i could hear his voice, but i couldn’t make out exactly what
he was saying. i picked up some words through the glass window in our kitchen.
when asked what words he heard, blake testified:
nothing specific, like, “the” and, “at”.
after refreshing his memory, blake backtracked
further:
i heard his voice, but i didn’t pick up any
words. i was going based off what i had heard from other people that day, and
based on his hand gestures, not his hand gestures, his motions. i didn’t hear
specific words.
i permitted the crown to cross-examine blake on
the recantation under s. 9(2) of the
canada evidence act
. the crown put
to him that his initial recounting of the accused’s confession was
unequivocal—he did not tell the police that he assumed or inferred that the
accused was confessing. blake responded:
the statement i made there [to the police]
and the statement i gave you [in court] was a clarified version of what i
meant, and i understand that i didn’t say “i think” or “i assume”, but that is
what i meant by “i misspoke” in that statement. that day was a very rough day
and if i forgot to say, “i think”, i apologize. but that’s what i meant by
today when i told you i misspoke, and that’s what i actually meant.
…
i could hear [the accused’s] voice, but not
his words, which is what i said earlier, which is what i should have told the
detective, but it was a pretty busy day.
blake agreed with defence counsel’s suggestion
that he recounted to the police the information he received from angie and
chantel, and not what he heard from the accused. when asked by the crown why he
had attributed such specific comments to the accused, blake explained:
the information i got from that about [the
bullet] going through the cheek and the ear is what i heard from chantel.
that’s what she told me. that’s why it seems so exact or seems a little
specific.
b.
necessity
blake recanted hearing the accused’s confession.
his police statement is inconsistent with his trial evidence. defence counsel
rightly conceded that necessity is established. as the majority held in
b.(k.g.)
at 799:
… the recanting witness holds the prior
statement, and thus the relevant evidence, “hostage”. the different “value” of
the evidence is found in the fact that something has radically changed between
the time when the statement was made and the trial and, assuming that there is
a sufficient degree of reliability established under the first criterion, the
trier of fact should be allowed to weigh both statements in light of the
witness’s explanation of the change.
c.
procedural reliability
when assessing procedural reliability, the court
must assess whether the trier of fact can meaningfully choose between
explanations for the hearsay statement through adequate substitutes for
contemporaneous cross-examination. “[p]rocedural reliability is concerned with
whether there is a satisfactory basis to rationally evaluate the statement”:
bradshaw
at para.
40
. if there is, the trier of fact at the end of trial will decide whether
to ultimately rely on the hearsay statement:
khelawon
at para.
50
.
the traditional safeguards—a video recording, an
oath, and a warning about lying—are not essential preconditions to admission of
a prior inconsistent statement. each case requires a contextual analysis. for
example, there can be sufficient substitutes for the oath:
b.(k.g.)
at 796,
805.
an essential precondition is the full
opportunity to cross-examine the declarant. “the most important factor
supporting the admissibility of a prior inconsistent statement of a non-accused
witness for the truth of its contents is the availability of the non-accused
witness for cross-examination”:
youvarajah
at para.
35
. the supreme
court has held that availability for cross-examination “goes a long way to
satisfying the requirement for adequate substitutes” and that “the opportunity
to cross-examine is the most powerful factor favouring admissibility”:
couture
at paras.
92, 95
; see also
b.(k.g.)
at 794-795.
video recording
the entire statement is recorded by video and
audio. blake is well-positioned in the frame. the quality of the recording is
sufficient. blake’s demeanour and reactions are easily observed.
cross-examination
blake is available for complete and meaningful
cross-examination. this point is readily established by the cross-examination
thus far. counsel already elicited blake’s explanation for the hearsay
statement. counsel also elicited evidence through blake that could undermine
whether he was positioned to hear the accused’s alleged confession. it is evident
that blake is willing and able to give thoughtful answers to questions.
blake’s availability for cross-examination is a
powerful factor that favours admitting the statement. his evidence, considered in
conjunction with the full trial record, will give the trier of fact a
satisfactory basis to rationally evaluate his hearsay statement.
oath and warning
blake was not put under oath or solemn
affirmation before giving his statement. he was not warned about the consequences
of lying.
the substance of these safeguards was nevertheless
in place. it is preferable that the police put a witness under oath and provide
certain warnings. but more important is that blake understood the solemnity of
the occasion. i am entitled to consider blake’s testimony on this issue:
r. v.
devine
,
2008 scc 36
at para.
28
;
r. v. trieu
,
2005 canlii 7884
(ont. c.a.) at paras.
84-87
. there was
no challenge to blake’s testimony that he was truthful with the police, he
understood the consequences of lying, he knew that his statement would have
consequences for the accused, he knew that his statement was being recorded, and
he knew that his statement would be used as evidence in the police
investigation.
circumstances of obtaining the statement
i must also consider the circumstances of the
statement to ensure that it was made voluntarily and that its admission would
not bring the administration of justice into disrepute:
b.(k.g.)
at 803.
defence counsel argued that blake was unlawfully
detained when he gave his statement. in my view, it is essential to not turn a
hearsay application into a full-scale detention analysis under s. 9 of the
charter
.
the lens under s. 9 is different and broader. the purpose of s. 9 is to protect
individual liberty interests from unjustified state inference:
r. v. grant
,
2009 scc 32
at para.
17
. the section protects those interests separate and
apart from whether the person gives a statement. by contrast, in a hearsay
application there is no rationale to consider a declarant’s liberty interests unless
they bear on the reliability of their statement.
multiple aspects of a detention analysis are not
material to the hearsay application. for example, the focus on police conduct that
is central to a detention analysis (
grant
at para.
31
) is misplaced in a
hearsay analysis. similarly, the broad examination of the entire interaction
between the individual and the state (
r. v. lafrance
,
2022 scc 32
at
paras.
31
, 33) is less germane than the circumstances at the time of the statement.
extending the hearsay analysis to include detention issues would vastly expand the
evidentiary scope of a hearsay application. the
voir dire
could overtake
the trial: see
bradshaw
at para.
42
.
in this case, blake chose to share his account
with the police. the video of the statement reveals a free-flowing
conversation. the police told him that he was not detained, not under arrest,
and not in any trouble. he drank water and used the washroom before starting
the interview. he disclosed the accused’s alleged confession without the police
asking probing questions. he knew that the police were investigating the
accused. the statement is by all accounts voluntary. these circumstances are
sufficient to warrant admission under the
b.(k.g.)
framework.
even if the hearsay application does include an
embedded detention analysis, there is no basis to find that blake was detained.
a person is only detained “when the deprivation of liberty may have legal
consequences”:
grant
at para.
29
. from the limited evidence on this
issue, i find that the police only treated blake as a witness. he was never
singled out for investigation. he was not interrogated. he was “invited” to
leave his home. the police did not occupy an adversarial role as against him:
grant
at para.
36
. “[i]nformation gathering in a non-adversarial context lacks the
essential character of a section 9 detention”:
r. v. folker
,
2016 nlca 1
at para.
16
. blake was only “detained” in the sense that he was “kept
waiting”:
r. v. mann
,
2004 scc 52
at para.
19
.
i acknowledge that the process of being transported
to the station and waiting to give his statement might have been unsettling for
blake. even if the video seems to show a calm and collected young man, it does
not foreclose that blake felt worried and anxious. still, there is nothing in
the circumstances of this statement that compromises the probative value of the
evidence or that would cause its admission to bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.
conclusion on procedural reliability
i am satisfied that the crown has established
the procedural reliability of blake’s statement on a balance of probabilities.
the trier of fact has sufficient tools to assess the truth and accuracy of the
statement and consider how it compares to blake’s in-court testimony. procedural
reliability is sufficient, on its own, to establish the threshold reliability
of the statement. there is no need to examine whether the substantive
reliability factors would tip the balance in favour of admission:
r. v. t.r.
,
2007 onca 374
at paras.
22-23
.
d.
probative value and prejudicial effect
having found that the crown established the
threshold reliability of blake’s statement, the defence opposes admission on
the basis that its prejudicial effect outweighs its probative value: see
bradshaw
at para.
24
;
khelawon
at para.
49
. this analysis requires me to
consider
whether the evidence is
worthy of being heard by the trier of fact but does not involve wading into the
ultimate question of whether the evidence should be accepted and acted upon:
r.
v. hart
,
2014 scc 52
at para.
98
.
defence counsel primarily advances two related
arguments. first, blake initially discussed the alleged incident with angie and
chantel, which tainted his purported account of hearing the accused confess to the shooting. second, blake was not in a physical position
to hear the accused allegedly confess. these are valid points to consider when
analyzing the probative value versus prejudicial effect of a hearsay statement:
gourlay, matthew, et al.
modern criminal evidence
. toronto: emond
montgomery, 2022 at 197-198; see also
r. v. humaid
,
2006 canlii 12287
(ont. c.a.) at para.
57
.
i am satisfied that the probative value of the statement outweighs its prejudicial effect. the
statement sufficiently assists in proving the accused’s identity as the shooter
when balanced against any distortion to the trial process caused by the
statement’s admission. i decline to invoke my discretion to exclude the
statement.
tainting does not raise a significant concern at
the admissibility stage in this case. blake’s statement does not suggest that his
recounting of the accused’s confession was influenced by earlier conversations.
even if the police did not instruct blake to confine himself to things that he
personally saw and heard, the statement shows that blake chose his words
carefully. he told the police when he was sharing an assumption (“
i’m
assuming
he was trying to cover it up”). he shared that he received the
perspectives of angie and chantel. he indicated uncertainties (“he
seemed
kind of proud of it”). and when it came to recounting the confession, he squarely
put the words in the accused’s mouth: “
i could see my dad explaining it
and i could hear … just saying that he shot him, like he shot him in the face.
…
he said that he shot him
in cheek, went through and up through his ear”).
i appreciate that a person can be subconsciously
influenced by things they heard from others. the prejudicial effect here is moderated
by blake’s testimony that he mistakenly attributed the confession to the
accused. the tainting argument would be harder to advance if blake refused to
acknowledge the possible influence of earlier conversations. in that situation,
blake’s statement might have distorted the fact-finding process. but the trier
of fact will benefit from the complete trial record to decide whether blake
heard the confession from the accused, and if so, what weight to afford it.
as for whether blake could have heard the confession
given the distance and closed window between him and the accused, that is a
trial issue. it is not so implausible that blake could have heard the
confession such that the probative value of the evidence is outweighed by its
prejudicial effect. even when he recanted hearing the confession, blake
initially maintained that he could hear the accused utter some specific words.
vi
conclusion
the complainant’s statement is not admissible.
blake’s statement is admissible.
released:  march
14, 2025
signed:
justice davin m.k. garg
i use blake dimillo’s first name to distinguish him from others in his family.
while the complainant initially referred to the location as a
“shed”, the statement as a whole establishes that he was referring to the
trailer.
the reports from the cfs say that the dna results are
estimated to be greater than one trillion times more likely if the respective
profiles originated from the complainant and the accused than if they originated
from unknown people unrelated to them. but the expert had no issue converting
the “one trillion times more likely” estimation to a certainty. defence counsel
did not argue in submissions that the dna might have been deposited by someone
else.
defence counsel points to passages in the complainant’s
statement to support this argument.
i previously ruled that the complainant did in fact make the
police statement at issue. implicit in this finding is that the complainant was
dishonest when he testified that someone else made the statement. it is not
plausible that the complainant genuinely forgot about making the statement.
i draw this fact from blake’s statement. defence counsel confirmed during
submissions that i could consider the entire statement when assessing the
application.
i took the “someone else” to refer to accused and the “something bad” to refer
to unwarranted charges and a deprivation of liberty.
blake’s grandmother confirmed the layout of the house in her
testimony.
these issues can be examined when considering the probative
value and prejudicial effect of the statement. i do not see any material
difference in this case from examining these issues here.