ontario court of
justice
citation:
r. v. gauthier
, 2025 oncj 180
date:
2025 04 07
court
file no.:  sudbury 24-40103608
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
pierre gauthier
before
justice g. jenner
heard
on april 4, 2025
decision
released on april 7, 2025
sandra town...................................................................................... on
behalf of the crown
mira ross................................................................................... on
behalf of pierre gauthier
alexander toffoli.............................................................................................. amicus
curiae
rabinder (‘rob’) sidhu.................... on
behalf of the ministry of the solicitor general
reasons for judgment re: section 527 order
jenner j.:
i.
introduction
what should occur when a person detained in
prison is ordered to be brought to court but refuses to attend? is the jail
entitled to respect a prisoner’s refusal to attend? can and should the court,
as the crown has requested here, specifically authorize and order a jail to use
physical force to remove the prisoner from their cell? is such an express
authorization necessary to allow for and require the use of force?
this procedural impasse has plagued mr. gauthier’s
matter and others locally. these reasons navigate these questions and examine
the interpretation of
s. 527
of the
criminal code
, which provides for
the conveyance of prisoners to court.
ii.
procedural history
pierre gauthier was detained in custody at the
sudbury jail pending criminal charges and an allegation that he breached a
conditional sentence order. he failed to attend his first court appearance on
november 20, 2024, and a bench warrant was issued. he was arrested and appeared
in bail court on december 13, 2024. since that appearance, mr. gauthier has
refused to be brought to court on december 16, 17, 18, 19, and 23, 2024, and
january 22, 2025.
the crown applied for an order pursuant to
s.
527
of the
criminal code
to have mr. gauthier brought to court, specifically
requiring the superintendent of the sudbury jail (the superintendent) to
deliver him to the greater sudbury police services (gsps) for that purpose.
section 527 reads, in part, as follows:
procedure to procure attendance of a
prisoner
527.   procuring attendance
(1) a judge of a superior court of
criminal jurisdiction may order in writing that a person who is confined in a
prison be brought before the court, judge, justice or provincial court judge
before whom the prisoner is required to attend, from day to day as may be
necessary, if
(a) the applicant
for the order sets out the facts of the case in an affidavit and produces the
warrant, if any; and
(b) the judge is
satisfied that the ends of justice require that an order be made.
provincial court judge’s order
(2) a provincial court judge has the same
powers for the purposes of subsection (1) or (7) as a judge has under that
subsection where the person whose attendance is required is within the province
in which the provincial court judge has jurisdiction.
conveyance of prisoner
(3) an order that is made under subsection
(1) or (2) shall be addressed to the person who has custody of the prisoner,
and on receipt thereof that person shall
(a) deliver the
prisoner to any person who is named in the order to receive him; or
(b) bring the
prisoner before the court, judge, justice or provincial court judge, as the
case may be, on payment of his reasonable charges in respect thereof.
detention of prisoner required as
witness
(4) where a prisoner is required as a
witness, the judge or provincial court judge shall direct, in the order, the
manner in which the prisoner shall be kept in custody and returned to the
prison from which he is brought.
detention in other cases
(5) where the appearance of a prisoner is
required for the purposes of paragraph (1)(a) or (b), the judge or provincial
court judge shall give appropriate directions in the order with respect to the
manner in which the prisoner is
(a) to be kept in
custody, if he is ordered to stand trial; or
(b) to be
returned, if he is discharged on a preliminary inquiry or if he is acquitted of
the charge against him.
…
given mr. gauthier’s serial refusal to attend,
the crown sought a provision in the order authorizing the use of reasonable
force to compel mr. gauthier’s attendance. such orders have been colloquially
referred to as “extraction orders.”
mr. gauthier’s case is not unique. in
r. v.
eshquib
,
2024 oncj 574
, mr. eshquib was in custody at the sudbury jail and
refused to appear in court. the crown requested an order pursuant to
s. 527
and
asked the court to include wording authorizing the use of reasonable force to
compel his attendance. in that case, i received evidence from a staff sergeant
at the sudbury jail that the jail’s practice is to ask a prisoner twice if they
are willing to attend court. if they refuse twice, the prisoner is not forced
to attend. the evidence established that, absent a specific clause authorizing
the use of force, the jail staff will not use physical means to remove a
prisoner from their cell to attend court.
in
eshquib
,
i was concerned that the
issues raised implicated the
charter
-protected liberty and security of
the person interests of the accused and other prisoners in similar
circumstances. they also implicated the duties of correctional services. i
appointed
amicus
to advocate on behalf of the liberty and security of the
person interests of the accused and determined that the superintendent should
be permitted to participate. after
amicus
was appointed, mr. eshquib
appeared in court voluntarily, rendering the legal issues moot. i declined to
address them as a result. that said, when the identical issue arose with mr.
gauthier, i made a new
amicus
appointment, and renewed my invitation for
the superintendent to participate. the matter was adjourned to april 4, 2025, for
the legal issues to be argued.
on april 4, 2025, mr. gauthier agreed to be
brought to court. counsel also attended on his behalf. mr. gauthier resolved
his matters. that resolution will see him serve a further sentence of seven
days’ custody. it is unlikely he will need to be brought to court by way of
s.
527
in that timeframe.
given mr. gauthier’s attendance, i heard
submissions from the parties on the question of mootness. i reserved my decision
on that question, and heard submissions on the interpretive questions with
respect to s. 527. the crown, counsel for mr. gauthier,
amicus
, and the
ministry of the solicitor general (solgen) as the ministry responsible for
correctional services and the superintendent, participated.
iii.
issues
a preliminary issue is: should the court apply
the doctrine of mootness and decline to issue a decision on the crown’s
application?
the ultimate issues is whether the court should include
language explicitly authorizing the use of force when making a s. 527 order to
bring a prisoner to court.
iv.
mootness
a proceeding is moot where the court is no
longer required to determine a legal dispute or live controversy between the
parties. a court will generally decline to decide such a case, which raises
only hypothetical or abstract questions:
borowski v. canada
,
1989 canlii 123 (scc)
, 1
s.c.r. 342, at p. 353. there is no dispute that the crown’s
s. 527
application
in respect of mr. gauthier became moot when he attended court on april 4, 2025,
and resolved his matters.
a court, however, retains the discretion to
decide the merits of a moot question, having mind to the rationales behind the
mootness doctrine: (i) that the adversarial process is fundamental to our legal
system; (ii) judicial economy; and (iii) sensitivity to the judicial role
within the political framework:
borowski
, at pp. 358-361. the crown and
amicus
encouraged the court to exercise its discretion to address the merits of
the issue, even though doing so would have no direct bearing on mr. gauthier’s
matters. solgen and mr. gauthier took no position in this regard.
having mind to the rationales for the mootness doctrine,
i am prepared to render a decision on the issue despite its mootness for the
following reasons.
first, the court’s appointment of
amicus
to
advance arguments concerned with a prisoner’s interests, while not a perfect
facsimile for a prisoner’s own advocacy, goes a long way towards preserving the
important function of the adversarial system. solgen’s participation brings a
further perspective to the matter and enhances the court’s ability to assess
the issues. moreover, the controversy leading to this hearing will only arise
without a prisoner’s direct participation. the controversy is generated by a
prisoner’s refusal to participate. a preferable alternative whereby the issue
is argued by all parties with a direct stake in the outcome is illusory.
second, judicial economy is served by allowing
this hearing to proceed. the issue became moot on the morning of the hearing.
court time and resources had been set aside and could not be repurposed for
other matters. all participants were present. the crown, solgen, and
amicus
had
filed detailed written submissions which the court had reviewed. moreover, “the
expenditure of judicial resources is considered warranted in cases which
although moot are of a recurring nature but brief duration”:
borowski
,
at p. 360. as the progressions of both this and the
eshquib
matter
demonstrate, it is challenging for the interpretation of s. 527 to be
considered with the proper participants in place before the issue becomes moot.
both the crown and
amicus
stated that prisoner attendance is a
particular local concern. if the court does not address the question until a
prisoner refuses for a sufficiently lengthy period, various stakeholders will be
left without clarity and guidance. other proceedings may be derailed and
delayed. there is a cost in the continued uncertainty of the law which ought to
be avoided.
i must be sensitive to my adjudicative role and
the risk that pronouncing judgment in the absence of a concrete dispute intrudes
upon the legislative branch. the legal question in this case, however, is the
proper interpretation of a routinely engaged provision. there appears, at first
impression, to be a real risk the provision is being misinterpreted by the
sudbury jail, with real consequences with respect to the proper administration
of justice. the court’s performance of its interpretive role will tend to
support rather than undermine the legislative function.
v.
interpretation of section 527
5.1      positions
solgen takes the position that correctional
staff are compelled by any standard order under
s. 527
to facilitate the
attendance of a prisoner at court and that
s. 527
must be read in conjunction
with
s. 25
of the
criminal code
, which authorizes the use of ‘as much
force as is necessary’ to execute the court’s order. the salient subsections
read as follows:
protection of persons acting under
authority
25 (1) every one who is required or
authorized by law to do anything in the administration or enforcement of the law
…
(b) as a peace officer or public
officer,
…
is, if he acts on reasonable grounds,
justified in doing what he is required or authorized to do and in using as much
force as is necessary for that purpose.
…
when not protected
(3) subject to subsections (4) and (5), a
person is not justified for the purposes of subsection (1) in using force that
is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm unless the
person believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary for the
self-preservation of the person or the preservation of any one under that
person’s protection from death or grievous bodily harm.
the crown agrees with solgen but maintains that its
request for a
s. 527
order explicitly authorizing reasonable and necessary
force is appropriate. in the alternative, the crown asks that i endorse an
alternative approach: the issuance of a warrant pursuant to
s. 512(1)
of the
criminal
code
, with an assistance order pursuant to
s. 487.02
of the
criminal
code
with a “reasonable use of force” provision.
amicus
agrees that
s. 527
can be used to compel attendance by force, and argues that subsection (4)
authorizes a provincial court judge to direct the manner in which the prisoner
shall be kept in custody and returned to the prison from which they are
brought. this may include reasonable and necessary force. but,
amicus
suggests,
the court should be hesitant to mandate use of force in the implementation of
their orders on the basis that use of force, particularly in extracting
prisoners from cells, can have unpredictable and harmful outcomes.
counsel for mr. gauthier limited their comments
to a submission that a
s. 527
order stipulating use of force was inappropriate
in mr. gauthier’s case.
5.2      analysis
i must be guided by the modern approach to
statutory interpretation: the words of an act are to be read in their entire
context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the
scheme of the act, the object of the act, and the intention of the legislature:
rizzo & rizzo shoes ltd. (re)
,
1998 canlii 837 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 27, at para.
21
. i must
also heed
s. 12
of the
interpretation act
, rsc 1985, c. i-21, which
stipulates that “[e]very enactment is deemed remedial, and shall be given such
fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation as best ensures the
attainment of its objects.”
i find that the words, context, scheme, and
object of the provision all support the interpretation that a s. 527 order
requiring that a confined person be brought to court compels the custodian, in
this case the superintendent, to deliver that person, and
s. 25(1)
of the
criminal
code
governs the degree of force which may be employed to meet that end. i
find that no further express language is required to authorize necessary force.
prisoners are not chattel. but they are persons whose
liberty is restricted by operation of law. they are detained, typically by
virtue of a warrant of committal when sentenced, or where judicial interim
release has not been granted, by a warrant of remand. the words parliament
employed in s. 527 recognize and reinforce the plain reality that prisoners
forfeit control over their movement from place to place. section 527 falls
under part xvi of the
criminal code
, titled “
compelling
appearance
of accused before a justice and interim release” [emphasis added.]. within the
confines of the provision itself, prisoners are to be “brought”, not invited. they
are “required”, not permitted, to attend. and the custodian is to “deliver the
prisoner”, not merely accompany them.  this does not support an interpretation that
permits the confined person a choice regarding whether to attend court.
this interpretation is reinforced when
considering s. 527(7).  section 527(7) addresses the specific circumstance in
which a confined person may be transferred to police custody not to attend
court but to assist a peace officer in some fashion. subsection (7)
specifically requires the prisoner’s consent in writing. parliament does not
speak in vain or use surplusage:
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
, 1 s.c.r. 61, par
lamer c.j. at para. 28. for the consent language in subsection (7) to have a meaningful
function, it cannot be the case that a prisoner’s consent is implied in the
case of an order under s. 527(1) to have the prisoner brought to court.
nor does the operation of
s. 527
depend on the
consent of correctional services. i agree with solgen’s submission that
s. 527
compels correctional services.  section 527(3) stipulates that the order is
addressed to the person who has custody of the prisoner. use of the imperative
“shall” provides that the custodian must “deliver the person to any person who
is named in the order to receive him” (typically the relevant police service):
interpretation
act
, s. 11.
i note that in
r. v. roussel
et al
,
(1989), 54 c.c.c. (3d), the quebec superior court held a contempt hearing when
the warden of a provincial detention centre failed to bring certain prisoners
to court following the issuance of a remand warrant. the court observed that as
“the order that the prisoners be brought to the court [was] addressed to the
keeper of the detention centre where the prisoners were, the [warden] must take
appropriate steps in order to comply with it.” the court also cautioned that
non-compliance might lead to being held criminally liable for contempt of court:
para. 35. while
roussel
was examining a remand warrant rather than a s.
527 order, i see no reason why the same reasoning would not apply.
it may seem axiomatic, but these two realities—that
the confined person’s consent is immaterial, and that the custodian is
compelled to act—give rise to the need in certain circumstances for the
application of force. that need is recognized for this context and more broadly
in
s. 25(1)
of the
criminal code
.
section 25(1)
of the
criminal code
stipulates
that everyone who is required to do anything in the administration or
enforcement of the law, if they act on reasonable grounds, is justified in
doing what they are authorized to do and “in using as much force as is
necessary for that purpose.” subsections (3) to (5) place limits on the use of
force that is intended or is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm.
section
527
clearly requires correctional services to deliver a person and engages the authorization
in
s. 25(1)
to use as much force as is necessary, subject to the limits in s. 25(3)-(5).
in this regard,
s. 527
is no different than the other powers authorized by the
criminal
code
which require peace officers to assume control over a person’s liberty.
section 527
functions as part of a network of provisions that govern a
person’s arrest, detention, transfer, and release.
this interpretation of ss. 527 and 25 also
accords with the purpose of the scheme. as the supreme court noted in
r. v. jordan
,
2016 scc 27
, the public, including victims of crime, have an interest in seeing
matters come to a timely conclusion: paras. 22-26. prisoners are frequently
required to attend court for their own appearances. at certain of those
appearances, their attendance is critical and mandatory. prisoners are also frequently
required as material witnesses in other matters.
section 527
is the mechanism
parliament installed to meet these needs. the criminal justice system cannot be
held hostage by a necessary participant who, despite being detained, refuses to
attend. the mischief to the proper functioning of our legal system is not
limited to serial non-attendances. a single non-attendance can impact other
justice system participants and precipitate harmful delays. an interpretation
of s. 527(1) which relies on the consent of the prisoner, correctional staff,
or both, would frustrate the object of the provision, and should be rejected:
rizzo
&
rizzo
shoes
, at para.
27
.
i am mindful that regulation 778 under the
ministry
of correctional services act
, r.s.o. 1990, chapter m.22, stipulates as
follows at
s. 7
:
(1)
no employee shall use force against an inmate
unless force is required in order to,
(a)
enforce discipline and maintain order within the
institution;
(b)
defend the employee or another employee or
inmate from assault;
(c)
control a rebellious or disturbed inmate; or
(d)
conduct a search.
i am not persuaded that this regulation runs
contrary to the use of necessary force as contemplated by
s. 25
of the
criminal
code
to bring a confined person before the court. the regulation receives
its authority from
s. 60
(a) and (e) of the
ministry of correctional services
act
, which allow for regulations respecting the operation, management, and
inspection of correctional institutions, and respecting the treatment,
training, employment, discipline, control, grievances, and privileges of
inmates. in my view, s. 7 governs the use of force which may be required for correctional
staff to fulfill their obligations under the
ministry of correctional
services act
. it is not intended to supersede or displace federally
mandated duties and powers under the
criminal code
. in any event, i note
that a confined person required to attend court pursuant to a
s. 527
order, but
who refuses to comply with that direction, would appear to be captured by s.
7(a), if not also s. 7(c) of the regulation.
i have been provided the case of
r. v.
jackson
,
2013 oncj 361
, in which the accused, a prisoner of the toronto
jail, was acquitted of assaulting a correctional officer engaged in extracting
the accused from his cell. the officer provided evidence that he was asked to
be part of an extraction team, and that he was neither aware of the reasons why
the accused was being transported to court nor of the existence of a remand
warrant. he simply assumed there was one. the court concluded the crown had
failed to lead evidence that there was a legal basis for the officer to use
force against the accused. this led the court to find that the accused was
entitled to use force to resist. i do not read
jackson
as standing for
the proposition that
s. 25
of the
criminal code
, in conjunction with
s.
527
, does not authorize the use of force when necessary. it simply stands as a
reminder that in a criminal trial in which the lawfulness of force is at issue,
the crown has an evidentiary onus.
it also bears emphasizing that
s. 25
does not
provide peace officers with carte blanche. the force used must, of course, be
necessary. unnecessary or excessive force will not only constitute a breach of
a confined person’s s. 7
charter
right to life, liberty, and security of
person, but may lead to criminal charges in respect of the officer: see, for
example,
r. v. nasogaluak
,
2010 scc 6
;
r. v. feeney et al
,
2007 canlii
20674
(ont. s.c.).
because a standard
s. 527
order requiring a
confined person to be brought to court compels the custodian to deliver that
person, and
s. 25(1)
of the
criminal code
governs the degree of force
which may be employed to meet that end, there is no need for the issuing judge
to stipulate an “extraction clause” or other specific authorization as to
force. indeed, if the court were to include language that on the surface
appears unobjectionable—for example “reasonable force”—anything short of a
verbatim inclusion of
s. 25
would convey an incomplete or inconsistent set of instructions
and would risk confusing the issue for the custodian. while inclusion of the exact
language in
s. 25
would not run that risk, and may be within the court’s
jurisdiction to include, such language is unnecessary. correctional staff have
a responsibility to know the law governing their duties, of which
s. 25
is a
critical piece.
i am mindful that s. 527(4) and (5) provide that
the court shall direct the manner in which the prisoner shall be kept in
custody and returned to the prison from which he is brought. i do not view
these provisions as authorizing or requiring a court to give instructions with
respect to use of force. i do not propose to list an exhaustive set of
circumstances in which the court may give directions pursuant to these
subsections, but note that they appeared targeted to issues such as where the
prisoner will be kept while required for court purposes. if, for example, the
prisoner is required as a witness over the course of several days, at a
location far from a jail, the court may need to make provision for their manner
of detention. subsections (4) and (5) were not, in my view, intended to grant
judges authority to stipulate use of force that is different than that set out
in
s. 25
.
in any event, a judge issuing a
s. 527
order is poorly positioned to
anticipate the circumstances that will exist when the order is executed. it is
for the judge to order the prisoner be procured.  it is for the custodian of
the prisoner to carry out the order. it is likewise the custodian’s
responsibility to know the law, including
s. 25
, and to act in accordance with
it.  it is the custodian’s responsibility to assess what, if any force is
necessary to comply with their duty and the law.
vi.
conclusion
if the issue were not moot, i would be prepared to
issue a
s. 527
order to compel the superintendent to deliver the prisoner to
the gsps to be brought to court, without explicit language with respect to the
use of force. language with respect to the use of force is unnecessary because
s.
527
requires that the superintendent comply with such an order irrespective of the
prisoner’s consent and
s. 25
of the
criminal code
governs the degree of
force, if any, to be employed by the custodian in complying with the terms of such
an order. that lawful force may be necessary in a given case is not an excuse for
failure to action the order.
given this outcome, it is unnecessary to
consider the alternative relief sought by the crown under
ss. 512(1)
and
487.02
of the
criminal code
.
released:  april 7, 2025
signed:
justice g. jenner
while that evidence was given in that separate proceeding, when asked, the
parties to this proceeding did not oppose my consideration of that evidence in
this case.