ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. sangster
, 2025 oncj 444
date:
2025 08 28
court
file no.:  pembroke 22-37200089-01
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
jevoi sangster
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on august 20, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on august 28, 2025
timothy mccann................................................................ counsel
for the federal crown
cassandra richards...................................................................... counsel
for the offender
richardson,
j.:
introduction
on october 24, 2024, justice march imposed a two
year less one day conditional sentence order on mr. sangster for the offences
of possession for the purpose of trafficking of fentanyl and possession for the
purpose of trafficking of cocaine.   the order included a house arrest term, requiring
mr. sangster to be in scarborough.  it also required him to be subject to
electronic monitoring.
on june 4, 2025, mr. sangster was found in
pembroke when police executed a search warrant at 756 pembroke street west
pursuant to the
controlled drugs and substances act
.  he is now charged
with drugs and weapons charges arising from the execution of that warrant.
those charges are not before me and, although i have a general awareness of
their nature, the parties agree that they are to be left to another court.  i
have disabused my mind of them.
the parties agree that mr. sangster is in breach
of the following provisions of justice march’s conditional sentence order:
a)
he breached condition 1 by failing to keep the peace.  the breach
arises from the fact that he breached the peace when he violated the other
provisions of his conditional sentence order, which i set out below.
b)
he breached conditions 8 and 9.  these conditions required mr.
sangster to be subject to house arrest at an address in scarborough, not approximately
360 kilometers away at 756 pembroke street west in pembroke.
c)
he breached conditions 12 and 13.  these conditions required mr.
sangster to be subject to electronic monitoring while he was on house arrest.
it is admitted that when he was arrested in pembroke on june 4, he was not
wearing the gps monitor that had been affixed to his body when he was placed on
the conditional sentence by justice march.
d)
other alleged breaches contained in the allegation of breach
material before the court are not admitted, nor are allegations relating to mr.
sangster’s willingness to participate in counselling and issues related to his
relationship with his supervisor.  i have disabused my mind of them.
the parties also agreed that as of june 4, 2025,
mr. sangster had 506 days left to serve on his conditional sentence.  he is
entitled to 1:1 credit for the period between june 4, 2025 and today’s date,
which i calculate at 86 days.  this leaves 420 days left to serve.
the parties are in agreement that the
conditional sentence order of justice march should be collapsed in some way.
they disagree on the amount to which it should be collapsed.
counsel for mr. sangster argued that mr.
sangster should be dealt with as follows:
a)
that i require him to serve 335 days (11 months) of his remaining
420 days in custody.
b)
that he then be permitted to resume his conditional sentence for the
85 days that would remain, before starting the probation order that justice
march placed him on.
the crown argued that mr. sangster’s entire
remaining conditional sentence should be collapsed.
despite counsel for mr. sangster’s able
argument, i find that the time to be served on mr. sangster’s remaining
conditional sentence should be collapsed and he should serve the balance of
that sentence in custody.
the proceedings before justice march
on march 12, 2024, mr. sangster appeared before
justice march and entered pleas to one count of possession for the purpose of
trafficking in fentanyl and one count of possession for the purpose of
trafficking in cocaine.
on july 29, 2022, police obtained a search
warrant for 362 mary street in the city of pembroke.  police had information
that this was the residence of joanne reis and her son nigel reis.  police also
had information from a confidential informant that there were individuals
coming from toronto in order to traffic in controlled substances.
the same day, just before they obtained the
search warrant, police observed three persons enter the residence.
once they obtained and executed the search
warrant, mr. sangster, along with timothy williams, brandon brownlee, jessica
dupont and a young person were located in the residence.  messrs. sangster,
williams and the young person were from toronto.
a search of mr. sangster’s person revealed seven
grams of powdered fentanyl and seven grams of powdered cocaine.  other items
were seized in the residence, including a loaded 9 mm glock handgun, a further
70 grams of fentanyl on a weigh scale, and another 45 grams of cocaine beside
the coffee table, but those items could not be attributed to mr. sangster.  mr.
sangster was also holding what was colourfully described by the crown and
justice march as “a fist full of dollars.”
mr. sangster’s cell phone was seized.  a search
of the cell phone revealed conversations consistent with mr. sangster
trafficking in controlled substances.
justice march found mr. sangster guilty and
ordered the preparation of a pre-sentence report.
the matter came on for argument on september 16,
2024.
the pre-sentence report revealed that:
a)
mr. sangster was barely a month past his 18
th
birthday
when he committed the offences.  he was 20 at the time of his sentencing.
b)
he is an only child.  his parents separated when he was four because
his father was deported due to having a criminal record.  he has a number of
half-siblings.
c)
he did not report being a witness to domestic violence when he grew
up, nor was abused as a child.  child protection was not involved with the
family.
d)
his father was murdered in the united states in september 2021.
e)
as he grew up, he focussed on basketball and was a member of rep basketball
teams which travelled, including to the united states.  this ended as a result
of the isolation requirements of covid-19.
f)
he reported that he did not have any friends.
g)
his mother described him as kind, respectful and loving.  he has a
close relationship with other members of his family.  he has struggled since
the death of his father and a close friend
.
h)
he suffers from tic syndrome, which involves involuntary nerve
movements.  his symptoms are worse when he is anxious or angry.  he sees a
doctor and is on medication for this ailment.
i)
he apparently had a girlfriend, but little was
known about her or the seriousness of their relationship.  she was a co-accused
on newmarket charges
.
j)
he was suspended a couple of times in elementary
school for fighting.
k)
he did not complete high school.  he got as far as grade 11.   he
found the isolation of covid-19 affected his performance at school.  he stated
that he was a “hands on person”.  he expressed the desire to complete his high
school education and become an electrician.
l)
he had some part time work for his uncle as a
labourer.  he wanted to work as an electrician with his uncle in the future.
m)
he denied use of alcohol.
n)
he started smoking cannabis when he was 16.  he stopped because of
basketball but resumed during the pandemic.
o)
he has experimented with percocet, which he finds help to calm in
down and helps him to sleep.
p)
he denied use of cocaine or fentanyl.
q)
with respect to fentanyl, he stated:  “i know that its killing a lot
of people, and its not something people should be giving to people.  i learned
from my mistakes that you shouldn’t be selling that to people, giving that to
people.  it’s a bad thing to the people who look at it from the outside, the
people who do it don’t think it’s wrong.  i don’t really think about that
stuff.”
r)
he described his involvement in the offences as
“being in the wrong place at the wrong time.”
s)
he denied being involved with a gang.
t)
he indicated that he “just smokes weed” to
control his stress and anger.
u)
he described himself as fun, funny, something of a loner, and
ambitious.
v)
his mother indicated that mr. sangster made a “360 degree turn”
during covid-19 because he could no longer engage in the sport of basketball.
at about the same time, mr. sangster’s father passed away.
w)
mr. sangster’s mother also indicated that she has never found
weapons or drugs among his effects.  she admitted to conducting random searches
of his room and effects “just to make sure”.
x)
mr. sangster was reported to be engaged and doing satisfactorily on
the community portion of his sentence from 2023.
y)
the author of the pre-sentence report concluded:
in considering
the potential risk of further offending identified areas of concerns in the
author’s opinion would therefore include poor decision making, engaging in
impulsive and risky actions, disregard for public safety, access to weapons,
potential substance abuse issues and negative peers and/or associates.  from
conversations with the subject, it is not clear whether he has an understanding
into some of these concerns, however the subject could in this author’s view
benefit from counselling services that will provide him with an opportunity to
examine, challenge, and restructure his thought processes to understand the
situation he has found himself in.  indeed, his mother observed that her son
would benefit from support to work on his emotions, stating “he is grieving,
sometimes he has outbursts, he needs emotional support.”
programs
services whether in the community or custody such as trauma counselling
anti-criminal thinking and or psychological counselling would be of benefit to
the subject as it is evident that he needs to come to terms with the death of
his father however ultimately it will be incumbent upon mr. sangster to
demonstrate the necessary motivation and learning if he is to move forward and
become a more productive member of society.
mr. sangster wrote a letter to the court which
was ultimately attached as a schedule to justice march’s judgment.  in the
letter, mr. sangster expressed the desire to “fully acknowledge and take
complete accountability” for his behaviour.  he stated that he was “committed
to making amends to everyone involved” and making sure that he did “not commit
any further crimes” or get himself “into any trouble.”  he said that he was at
“rock bottom” as a result of the pandemic and the deaths of his father and his
friend.  he stated that, “i recognize that i cannot keep living my life and
going down this path.  i want to live and i want to be there for my family
members especially my little sister.”  he concluded, “i understand that an
apology cannot undo the harm i have done but i am hoping it shows that i am
remorseful and sorry.  i am truly hoping that i get the chance to make it right
by living within the law of this great country.”
crown counsel sought a carceral sentence of
between two and three years.
defence counsel sought a conditional sentence in
the range of two years, to be followed by three years probation.
on october 24, 2024, justice march rendered his
decision.  it is now reported as
r. v. sangster,
2024 oncj 549
.  justice
march found that:
a)
mr. sangster was “trying to right his recently listing ship.  i
accept that real jail scared him.  he does not want to go back”  (paragraph 67).
b)
he was expecting a new child, which justice march expressed hope
would “motivate him to effect positive change” (paragraph 67).
c)
there were no breaches or new allegations between his release from
custody in february 2024 and the date of his sentencing (paragraph 68).
d)
he expressed a desire to pursue a career as an electrician
(paragraph 68).
e)
the gravity of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking, particularly in pembroke, was a serious offence and was
aggravating (paragraph 72a).
f)
the fact that mr. sangster’s activity was
planned and profit-driven was aggravating (paragraph 72b).
g)
he incurred further charges while on bail (paragraph 72b).
h)
his guilty plea was mitigating (paragraph 73a).
i)
his apparent expression of genuine remorse was
mitigating (paragraph 73b).
j)
his youth and “good prospects of prosocial
integration in his community” was mitigating (paragraph 73c).
k)
his ongoing support from his family and friends was mitigating.
pursuant to
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
,
justice march considered the fact that mr. sangster is a young black man who had
a deprived childhood.  he also noted that mr. sangster was from scarborough, a
part of toronto well known for gun and drug violence.  justice march noted at
paragraphs 96 to 101 the dilemma posed by mr. sangster’s sentencing:
to my mind,
the correlation can be drawn between the incessant violence and sale of drugs,
notwithstanding a formidable police presence in the community in which sangster
was raised, and his desensitization to the moral blameworthiness inherent in
drug trafficking.
i hearken back
to what sangster himself said to the author of his psr about his life
experience as a child growing up in scarborough. he stated:
i've always
been in the environment where violence can happen. we didn't have much money,
so we've always lived in places where stuff happens. i've seen it . . . it's a
good neighborhood [mornelle court], but it's also a bad neighborhood. i've seen
people getting robbed, people getting hurt. i've never been a stranger to that
type of stuff. my mom did the best she can to get us out, but she didn't have
lots of money.”
to borrow the
analogy of crown counsel, most five-year-olds would know the inherent harm in
the sale of fentanyl, if they came from middle to upper class white backgrounds
where the sale of illegal drugs around public basketball courts is more than
likely non-existent. the situation is markedly different for the marginalized,
working class, underprivileged, black, five-year-old, who has to grow up in
that type of environment through no fault of his own, nor any exercise of free
will on his part.
i find that
sangster experienced those realities in his life from a very young age, and it
impacted his thought processes and values. he tried to avoid the temptation of
easy money through the sale of drugs. covid-19 intervened and put an end to his
dream of making it to the nba. he gave up and gave in. (see
morris
at
para.
154
)
already, he
has paid a heavy price for the lifestyle he tried to avoid as a boy but fell
into as a young adult. he has spent the equivalent of two years less a day in
jail.
at this
juncture, i must now decide what to do with him in treating him as a
first-time, youthful offender, just 18 years and one month of age when he
committed the crimes for which i must sentence him. he made bad choices, but he
did not come to them with the same moral blameworthiness that should attach to
someone with the vast array of options in life unavailable to less fortunate
segments of society.
ultimately justice march imposed a sentence of
two years less a day conditional, to be followed by three years of probation.
for the first sixteen months of the sentence,  he ordered mr. sangster to abide
by house arrest.  for the remaining portion of the sentence, he was to be
subject to a curfew between 11 and 6.  he was to be subject to electronic
monitoring for both the house arrest and the curfew.
justice march reasoned at paragraphs 113 and
114:
sangster is far from the
perfect candidate for a conditional sentence, but he is no hardened criminal.
as a sentencing judge, i need not throw up my hands and tell sangster at this
point and going forward from today, the only judicial response to any continued
offending on his part is jail.
at the root, i fear that, if i
had acceded to the crown’s submission and sent sangster to the penitentiary, i
would have risked institutionalizing him for life. no one in society would
benefit from such an outcome. the cycle of anti-black racialization, poverty,
desperation, poor life choices, and crime would go on for him, and perhaps his
unborn child too. instead, i prefer to hold him accountable, but at the same
time, give him one last chance at hope for a better future.
in my view, when mr. sangster breached the
conditional sentence order in june 2025, he blew the “one last chance” that
justice march gave him.
with respect to what the appropriate carceral
sentence for mr. sangster’s crime should be, justice march had difficulty
pinning that down.  he concluded at paragraph 78 of his judgment that there was
“…no clear appellate authority for determining the appropriate ambit of
sentence for trafficking in smaller quantities of fentanyl by street level
dealers.”
justice march endorsed justice boswell’s review
of the sentencing jurisprudence in
r. v. brazier,
2023 onsc 6315
, where
justice boswell stated at paragraph 69, “….it would appear to me that the range
is beginning to settle into something between 18 months on the low end and 36
months on the high end, depending on the particular aggravating and mitigating
circumstances present.”
however, justice march also endorsed justice
calsavara’s decision in
r. v. grant,
2021 oncj 507
, where she imposed a
two year less one day conditional sentence for possession of 9.5 grams of
fentanyl, 26 grams of crack cocaine, 13.2 grams of powdered cocaine and 4 grams
of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking.  justice march noted at
paragraph 86 that “
grant
is the closest on the facts to the case before
me.”
mr. sangster’s criminal record
mr. sangster’s criminal record was filed as an
exhibit.  it has two entries.
he was convicted at newmarket on july 27, 2023
for the offence of possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm with
ammunition, contrary to
section 95
of the
criminal code
,
and failing to
comply with a release order contrary to
section 145
of the
criminal code
.
he was sentenced to 444 days credit for time served, 285 days custody plus 18
months probation.
i note that although mr. sangster was convicted
and sentenced on these charges
before
he was convicted and sentenced by
justice march, he was on bail for the pembroke charges when he committed these
offences.
he was sentenced by justice march on two counts
of possession for the purpose of trafficking.  one count involved fentanyl.
the other count involved cocaine.   justice march sentenced him to two years
less a day conditional, on the fentanyl count, and one year conditional
concurrent on the cocaine count.  he also placed him on probation for a period
of three years.
for a man of 21 years, this is a significant
record.
the law with respect to breaches of
conditional sentences
when an offender breaches his conditional
sentence, there is a presumption that the offender will serve the balance of
the conditional sentence behind bars.  this is necessary to ensure that the
offender complies with the conditions imposed by being under the constant
threat of incarceration:
r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5
at paragraph
39
.
termination of a conditional sentence order does
not, however, necessarily flow from every breach.  if the breach involves the commission
of new offences, or endangers the community, all or a portion of the unexpired
sentence should be served in prison:
r. v. jw,
1997 canlii 3294
(ont.
c.a.).
in determining the appropriate sanction for a
breach, the court is required to continue to exercise the principles of
restraint, proportionality, denunciation, and general and specific deterrence.
i must also consider the circumstances of the original offence, the nature and
circumstances of the breach, the circumstances of the offender, and the time
remaining on the conditional sentence order.  i must determine whether the
conditional sentence imposed was longer than what would have been an
appropriate carceral sentence.  i must address whether it is still appropriate
to serve the original sentence or a portion of it:
r. v. antaya,
2022
onca 819
.
the circumstances of the original
offence
the insidious and devastating effects of
fentanyl trafficking in ontario and canada were considered by the court of
appeal in
r. v. loor,
2017 onca 696
,
r. v. lynch,
2022 onca 109
and by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
.  justice
march considered the impact of these cases, particularly
loor
and
parranto
when he sentenced mr. sangster originally.
recently, in
r. v. hier,
2025 oncj 383
, at
paragraphs
49 to 62
, i commented on the disproportionate impact that fentanyl
trafficking has had in the city of pembroke:
as one of two
resident judges in pembroke, and as a judge who frequently presides in renfrew
county’s mental health and addiction treatment court, i am all too familiar
with the scourge of fentanyl trafficking in our community.
as i have said
in other fentanyl trafficking cases, hardly a day goes by when i have not heard
of a person who has overdosed from fentanyl.
fentanyl
trafficking has had a disproportionate effect on pembroke.  according to a
cbc report a year ago, pembroke has more than double the number of fatal
overdoses per capita than the rest of ontario.  the mortality rate in
pembroke is also four times higher than the surrounding area.
the human cost
of fentanyl is staggering.
equally
staggering is the financial cost.
pembroke only
has a population of 15,000.   the county itself has a population of
just over 100,000.  it is the largest of the 57 original counties in
ontario and encompasses a geographical area that is larger than the province of
prince edward island.
renfrew county
does not have a public transit system, or a shelter for individuals who are
suffering from mental health and addictions problems.  it does not have
enough treatment facilities and we must often resort to other – often far
afield – communities to meet the treatment needs of the homeless, addicted, and
mental health population.
to try to
combat the interplay between mental health, addictions and homelessness, the
county of renfrew paramedic service started the mesa project a year ago.
the project involves a paramedic, a crisis worker and an addictions counsellor
who go out into the community to meet with and provide care to individuals who
are in this population.
these workers
spend their days trying to reach the homeless, mental health afflicted and
addicted population, many of whom live in encampments in the city.  every
day, at great cost to the community, these workers patiently try to reach those
whom drug traffickers like ms hier have helped render unable to function and
live a normal life.
the county of
renfrew is commended for the progressive steps it has taken to address this
serious problem.
the city of
pembroke, which prides itself in the slogan, “the heart of the ottawa valley”
has had significant difficulties addressing the problem.  significant
tensions have arisen between the community, on the one hand, and the homeless,
addicted, and mental health afflicted population and those who serve them on
the other.  local politicians, police officers, nurses and community
agencies are caught in the middle.
in fairness to
the community, the crisis in homelessness, mental health and addictions,
particularly fentanyl addiction, in pembroke has resulted in more frequent
complaints of witnessing drug trafficking, finding drug paraphernalia, and
breaches of the peace such as loitering, shouting and verbal abuse, and public
defecation.
while fentanyl
trafficking and addiction is not the only source of these problems – as i have
stated there are homelessness and mental health crises too – fentanyl
trafficking and addiction contributes
significantly
to all of
these community problems and tensions.
this crisis is
tearing the community apart.
although those words were written in the summer
of 2025, they were just as applicable when justice march originally sentenced
mr. sangster.
they are just as applicable today.
although the facts in
hier
are
significantly different, i find that mr. sangster’s moral blameworthiness as a
trafficker in fentanyl is very high.  the passage of time since his sentencing
before justice march has not changed that.
the nature and circumstances of the
breach
as agreed upon by the parties, i have disabused
my mind with respect to the new offence allegations against mr. sangster.  i
therefore am unable to find, following
jw
, supra
that the community is
in danger or that the breach arises from the commission of new offences.
that is not to say that the nature and
circumstances of his breach are not serious.
on the contrary, it is very serious and highly
aggravating.  a key component of any conditional sentence – indeed one of the
things that sets it apart from a probationary disposition – is house arrest.
proulx
makes it clear that this is designed to reflect the punitive aspect of the
conditional sentencing regime.  a house arrest also serves to protect the
public from the accused.  in the case of a drug trafficker like mr. sangster,
if he is serving a period of home confinement it is more difficult to engage in
his stock and trade.  not impossible, but more difficult.
thus, in the hierarchy of breaches, short of the
commission of additional offences or conduct that puts the public at risk, i
can think of no more serious breach than a breach of a house arrest condition.
now there are breaches of house arrest and then
there are breaches of house arrest.
house arrest is particularly difficult on
offenders.  it amounts to isolation.  it can be extremely difficult on
offenders who have families or vast networks of friends.  it is also very
difficult on offenders who have significant mental health and addictions
problems.  it is a significant imposition on an offender’s liberty.  it is not
unusual for an offender to breach their house arrest for a short period of
time. it is not unusual for an offender to breach a conditional sentence more
than once.  not every breach of house arrest therefore will result in a total
collapse of a conditional sentence.
this, however, was a significant breach.  removal
of a gps monitor and being found by police in a location which, apart from the
commission of offences, you have no connection to is extremely serious.  this
is particularly so when the location is in excess of 360 kilometers and over
four hours away from where he was required by court order to be and was the
location where he committed the offences for which he was sentenced.
it was a total repudiation of the conditional
sentence order.
mr. sangster’s moral blameworthiness on the
breach is extremely high.
he decided to essentially thumb his nose at
justice march’s order and the sentencing logic that was behind it.
he intended to commit a wilful and flagrant
violation of justice march’s order.
he does not suffer from a serious mental health
or addiction problem which make a house arrest term of a conditional sentence
order more difficult to follow and which would inform the breach.
the assessment of sentencing
provisions with respect to the appropriate disposition for the breach
wholesale breach of a house arrest term in a
conditional sentence order must be strenuously denounced by the court.  this is
necessary to give continued efficacy to the conditional sentence regime.  a
denunciatory response to a house arrest term of a conditional sentence order is
necessary to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice and in
the use of a conditional sentence as a sentencing tool.
a breach of the nature that mr. sangster
committed here must also be punished in a way that serves to deter others from
engaging in similar behaviour.
mr. sangster still has a three-year probation
order to serve.  he is only 21 years old.  he was in breach of his release
order when he committed the newmarket offences.  he needs to be punished in a
way that will specifically deter him from committing similar breaches in the
future.  he has not learned that court orders must be followed.  the
disposition must help him so learn.
mitigating factors
at 21, mr. sangster is a young man.
mr. sangster admitted the breach.  that said, a
finding that he was in breach was almost an absolute certainty.
mr. sangster is black.  justice march, citing
morris
,
expressed concern about the over-representation of black offenders in
custody.  he also noted the offender’s background and the presence of violence in
his life that has taken the lives of his friend and of his father.
i am also concerned about all of these things
and i recognise these principles.
however, when given a chance by the court to
ameliorate the long-term effects of his background and avoid becoming another institutionalized
black man in custody, mr. sangster breached.  as i have pointed out, it was not
a trifling breach, which the court would be more likely to be lenient in
disposing of.  nor was it a breach that could be understood by virtue of a
mental health or addiction problem.  it was a major breach.  it was a major
breach without any explanation.  the court simply cannot countenance it.
harsh conditions in custody
defence counsel filed a report from staff
sergeant munro of the ottawa carleton detention centre which set out the
conditions that mr. sangster has endured while he has been in custody.
mr. sangster has been housed in general
population at the institution.  the report indicates that between june 4 and
august 18, 2025, he was subject to lockdown for 12 full days, two afternoons
and evenings, two mornings, two afternoons and 34 evenings.
the report does not discuss the extent to which mr.
sangster may have been subjected to overcrowding.  i routinely receive reports
that inmates are housed three or four to a cell designed for two.
mr. sangster also filed an affidavit, which was
admitted on consent, in which:
a)
he complained that he had not been outside for approximately three
weeks;
b)
he stated that he has been confined to a cell with three to a cell
“for the majority of the time”;
c)
he stated that he sleeps on a mattress on the floor;
d)
he complained that inmates eat their meals in the cell and because
there are no tables, they must eat on the floor or from their knees;
e)
he complained that the air conditioning and ventilation systems have
not been working;
f)
he stated that his medical condition has
worsened and that his medication was changed while he was at the jail;
g)
he stated that he has been working on completing his high school
education while at the jail and he is now finished the math portion of his
program.
i have commented on these intolerable conditions
in other decisions, see for example,
r. v. kt,
2025 oncj 234
, where i
gave substantial credit for pre-sentence lock-down and overcrowding with
respect to an offender who is developmentally delayed and a mentally unwell
individual.
mr. sangster is not, however, kt.  he does not
have the same mental health and capacity issues which exacerbated the effect of
harsh conditions on kt.  nor is he receiving a sentence as long as kt’s, which
was a substantial penitentiary sentence.
the extent to which harsh conditions are to be
considered by the court in mitigation is discretionary.  the court is obligated
to consider the fitness of the sentence.  credit for harsh conditions cannot be
used to make a fit sentence unfit:
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
;
r.
v. brown,
2025 onca 164
.
nor, in the case of a conditional sentence
breach, can it be used to make the appropriate degree of punishment inappropriate.
in this case, in my view, it would render the
degree of punishment inappropriate.  justice march’s sentencing decision was in
part based on his finding, set out above, that mr. sangster had seen the error
of his ways and did not want to go back to jail.
i repeat that his actions in thumbing his nose
at the court’s decision are so grave that anything less than a complete
collapse of his conditional sentence – harsh conditions or not – would not pay
sufficient heed to the principles of proportionality, denunciation and deterrence.
i, therefore, decline to grant any additional
credit for the harsh conditions that mr. sangster has found himself in while in
custody.
disposition
for these reasons, despite defence counsel’s
excellent submissions, i agree with the crown that mr. sangster’s conditional
sentence must be completely collapsed.
i find that he was in breach as of june 4, 2025
and that the conditional sentence is collapsed as of that date.
i find that he has 420 days left to serve.
i terminate the conditional sentence order and
require him to serve 420 days in custody.
once he has completed the custodial portion of
the sentence, the probation order issued by justice march will begin.
released:  august 28, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson
i was told in court that like his father, his close friend also died
violently.
see the information related to mr. sangster’s criminal record, below.