ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. vitellaro
, 2025
oncj 200
date:  2025·04·11
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
raymond
vitellaro
judgment
evidence heard: february
10,11, april 11, 2025.
delivered: april
11, 2025
ms. tharziha ganeshamoorthy.............................................................
counsel for the crown
mr. raymond vitellaro ................................................................................................   defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
mr. chelliah was driving his wife and his
87-year-old mother-in-law southbound on warden avenue when a black audi crossed
the centre line and hit his vehicle head-on. the audi then continued and hit
two other oncoming vehicles. all three persons in mr. chelliah’s car were taken
to hospital with serious injuries. all three collisions were captured on mr.
chelliah’s forward and rear dash camera videos.
mr. vitellaro was the driver of the black
audi. he is charged with impaired operation s 320.14(1)(a), dangerous operation
s 320.13 and refusing to provide a bodily sample s 320.15(1).
during the trial mr. vitellaro identified a
charter
issue – whether his right to
counsel was breached when he wasn’t able to speak to his counsel of choice. that
issue was addressed in the evidence and the crown called the witness involved. the
crown and the court both monitored the evidence for other potential
charter
issues throughout the trial.
on the third day of trial, mr. vitellaro
brought an application alleging a further right to counsel breach and a breach
of his right to a trial within a reasonable time. the court did not permit the
right to counsel breach allegation to be expanded as the crown had closed its
case and the counsel of choice issue had been fully canvassed in the first two
days. the
charter
s
11(b) breach was added to the issues to be considered.
right to counsel
p.c. korte advised mr. vitellaro he was
under arrest for impaired operation at 1948h. he was being assessed in the
ambulance at the time. constable wong read mr. vitellaro his right to counsel
advice at 1958h. he explained that he delayed providing that advice until the
two ems personnel in the ambulance completed their medical evaluation.
mr. vitellaro asked to speak with a
particular lawyer, ms. rishma gupta. he provided p.c. wong with the phone
number for her office. p.c. wong asked a road sergeant to attend the hospital
with a cellphone to provide access to counsel there, but mr. vitellaro was
assessed and released quickly by the attending physician.
they left the hospital and arrived at 5
district shortly afterwards. after booking, mr. vitellaro was placed in a cell
and p.c. wong called counsel of choice at 2102h. he called twice as there was
no answer. there was no information provided by that office for after-hours
contact, so the officer left call-back information on the voicemail. at 2115h
p.c. wong placed a second call to counsel, again leaving call-back information.
at 2120h there was still no response. p.c. wong spoke with mr. vitellaro and
advised him that his lawyer had not called back. constable wong advised mr.
vitellaro that a duty counsel lawyer was available. mr. vitellaro said he’d
like to speak with that lawyer. by 2128h counsel of choice had still not called
back so p.c. wong placed a call to duty counsel. mr. vitellaro spoke with the
duty counsel lawyer from 2147h to 2158h.
mr. vitellaro testified that he was told by
pc wong that, “it’s duty counsel or nothing” and he agreed to speak to that
lawyer as it was his only choice.
the delay in providing the right to counsel
advice was reasonably explained by the need to complete the medical assessment.
constable wong properly waited until the accused was in a position to receive
and understand that advice.
mr. vitellaro said, “that night was a blur
to me”. even at the station the events are a blur. he does not now remember
going to the hospital or being seen by a doctor. he was able to identify his
counsel of choice at the station. when asked about the conversation with pc
wong at 2120h where he was told that his lawyer was not responding he said
“honestly i can’t answer that because i don’t remember that part”. given his
state at the time and his present lack of recollection i find his evidence that
pc wong told him it was “duty counsel or nothing” to be unreliable and
inconsistent with the credible evidence of that officer who was sober and
acting in a professional capacity. mr. vitellaro said he became angry when he
was told duty counsel was his only choice, but on the cell video that was played
there was no such apparent reaction. the audio which the crown says is
conclusive on this issue was recorded from the booking desk and wasn’t loud
enough to permit cross-examination so was not considered.
mr. vitellaro’s concern that the cell video
evidence was altered and was a “cgi deepfake” when compared with an original
version on one of three usb copies turned out to be a non-issue. all three
versions of the cell video were found to be consistent by the crown and the accused
when they compared them over a break.
p.c. wong made reasonable efforts to reach
mr. vitellaro’s lawyer. counsel who are available to provide after-hours advice
typically provide contact information at their office number. other offices
have messages saying they are not able to provide after-hours advice. the lack
of any information about after-hours contact results in uncertainty for persons
waiting in custody.
in this case the police were right to wait a
reasonable time and make several attempts on the chance that counsel might
respond. when there was no response, it was reasonable for constable wong to
remind mr. vitellaro that one of his options was to speak with a duty counsel
lawyer who was available to give advice.
if mr. vitellaro was not satisfied with that
offer and wanted to contact another lawyer, he knew the police would help him.
he chose to speak to the lawyer immediately available and p.c. wong contacted
duty counsel at his request. mr. vitellaro spoke with that lawyer and he made
no complaint about the legal advice received. there’s no evidence of a s 10(b)
breach.
dangerous operation
the credible direct evidence of ms.
westacott and consistent circumstantial evidence showed that mr. vitellaro was
the driver of the audi involved in all three collisions. he admitted that in
his testimony.
the credible evidence of mr. chelliah and reliable
confirmation from his dash camera videos show that mr. vitellaro drove his audi
at a fast speed as he approached an intersection. he then drove into oncoming lanes,
directly into mr. chelliah’s vehicle and continued on hitting two other cars.
mr. vitellaro described the contact with mr. chelliah’s car as a “clip” in
questions he put to the witnesses, but mr. chelliah’s credible evidence and the
dash cam video shows he was hit head-on. the slight angle to the contact was
caused by mr. chelliah’s reaction to the approaching audi as he turned slightly
immediately before contact. the significant momentum of the vehicle caused it
to continue past the first collision into two further collisions.
the crown is required to prove the
prohibited act – that the accused was driving in a manner that was dangerous to
the public, viewed on an objective standard, having regard to all of the
circumstances including the nature, condition and use of the place and the
amount of traffic that was there. it is the manner of driving, not its
consequences that matters –
r v kelly,
2025 onca 92
at par
52
.
the crown must also prove the required
intent – that the accused’s driving was a marked departure from the standard of
care that a reasonable person would observe in the circumstances –
r v kelly
at para
52
.
mr. vitellaro worked a 14-hour shift ending
that morning. he went home but was called out to see a friend. he was returning
from his friend’s at the time of this incident. he testified that he bought a
bag of cheetos at a gas station on the way home. he did not open the cheetos
there. he decided to open the bag with his teeth and one hand while driving as
he approached the intersection. somehow the bag of cheetos exploded, causing
dust to go into his face. he had bought the spicy kind of cheetos so that
affected his allergies and caused him to sneeze. the sneeze caused him to lose
control of his car. he doesn’t remember anything about the collisions as he
couldn’t even see what was happening.
mr. vitellaro’s evidence gives no reason for
a bag of cheetos to explode in his face with such force that it triggered
allergies or a sneezing reaction and blinded him to the point where he could
not see. there’s no evidence such a thing is even possible. even if a bag could
explode as he said, that does not explain why he would react to that by turning
left into oncoming traffic instead of trying to slow down. it’s not plain why
he would buy a bag of “spicy cheetos” if the dust from that product triggers
his allergies. i accept that he distracted himself while driving with the
cheetos as he said. the photograph he took upon retrieval of his car shows
cheetos scattered on the floor. it’s plain though that they ended up there as a
result of the three collisions. mr. vitellaro’s testimony as to the cause of
the crash was not credible.
mr. vitellaro was not sure when his long
work shift ended. he said he was exhausted. he has no recollection of the
circumstances of the various collisions. his memory of the events after the
collision is also suspect as he said “that night is a blur”. he doesn’t
remember significant events like going to the hospital in an ambulance. i find
his recollection about the events leading up to the collision to be unreliable.
the video evidence shows mr. vitellaro was
driving faster than the traffic around him. he drove at speed towards an
intersection on a major roadway. he then drove across the centre line directly
into mr. chelliah’s vehicle. his speed was such that his vehicle continued on
and hit two further cars.
driving at a fast speed towards an
intersection where other traffic was present while distracting himself created
a situation of risk. crossing the centre line and driving into several oncoming
vehicles was plainly dangerous to the public.
mr. vitellaro drove in a “exhausted”
condition, he persisted even though his drowsiness was pronounced and
eventually caused him to lose consciousness. prior to the crash he distracted
himself from his driving task while travelling at speed towards a busy
intersection. i find his driving as a whole to the point where he lost
consciousness showed a marked departure from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would apply in those circumstances.
refuse
p.c. lam was the evaluating officer for the
drug recognition examination. regulation
sor/2008-196
requires that an
evaluating officer be a drug recognition expert (dre) accredited by the
international association of chiefs of police. proof of constable lam’s
certification was marked as exhibit #3.
constable lam conducted the tests and
procedures prescribed in that same regulation. mr. vitellaro performed poorly
on the divided attention tests which test mental focus and physical ability.
mr. vitellaro’s responses were delayed and slow. his movements were slow. he
swayed back and forth while standing. he performed poorly on all of the
physical tests. when asked to walk on a line one foot in front of the other he
was off balance and took multiple attempts to take even one step. contrary to
instruction he held out his arms in a t fashion to try to gain balance but that
didn’t help. he missed every heel to toe step and repeatedly fell to the side.
when asked to raise one leg and hold it he lost his balance after a second. the
longest he could hold a foot off the ground before losing his balance was 3
seconds out of 30 requested. mr. vitellaro performed poorly on all physical
tests. he was cooperative, but generally unable to follow simple instructions.
constable lam’s evidence is supported by the video and audio record of the full
dre evaluation.
constable lam took into account mr.
vitellaro’s statement that he had a past hip injury. the officer did not see
any signs of pain during the movements and attempted movements. on the contrary
at one point mr. vitellaro stretched on his own by bending forward with both
hands and touching his toes then returning upright. that was not part of the
test but early in the process showed the officer mr. vitellaro had physical ability
and flexibility. balance and mental focus were the issues during the physical
tests.
p.c. lam considered the results of the dre
evaluation and information about the crash and the accused as provided by the
officers who attended the scene. p.c. wong told him that during transport the
accused was in a very lethargic state, slow to respond. at one point his body
slumped forward, and it appeared he passed out in the cruiser. mr. vitellaro
also “nodded off” while his blood pressure was being taken during the dre test.
considering all of the evidence available to the officer including the points
listed above, constable lam formed reasonable grounds to believe that mr.
vitellaro’s ability to operate a conveyance was impaired by a narcotic
analgesic. that conclusion was objectively reasonable. mr. vitellaro’s
statements to the officer (after speaking to counsel, during the dre
examination) about increased suboxone use (a medication that includes a form of
opiate) that day was further evidence consistent with the officer’s conclusion
and available to confirm grounds - s 320.31(9).
the belief that mr. vitellaro’s ability to
operate a conveyance was impaired by one of the types of drugs listed in s
320.28(5) provided reasonable grounds for the demand under s 320.28(4)(a) requiring
mr. vitellaro to provide a urine sample for analysis to ascertain the presence
of a listed drug.
mr. vitellaro refused outright to provide
the sample. pc lam patiently explained the basis for the demand and the legal
requirement that the accused perform the test. he also explained the
consequences of refusal including the further criminal charge, provincial
suspension and criminal prohibition. he repeated those explanations several
times.
constable lam asked mr. vitellaro why he was
refusing. the accused referred to past legal advice given to him by his lawyer,
not by the duty counsel lawyer he spoke to that night. constable lam explained
that the law changed three years earlier in 2018 and prior legal advice might
not be current. despite that warning mr. vitellaro continued to refuse.
at trial mr. vitellaro gave a different
reason. he testified that he heard an officer in the station say that if he’s
on medication he’s “wasted” and shouldn’t be driving. at that time he decided
to refuse any demand. in cross-examination he said that the statement he
referred to was made not at the time of refusal but at booking by someone not
in that room. he could not recall if it was a male or female police officer.
mr. vitellaro’s explanation finds no support
in the evidence. it is contradicted by his statements made at the time. even if
mr. vitellaro’s present recollection were correct, it does not provide a
reasonable excuse for refusing the lawful demand.
the charge of refusing to provide a sample
of a bodily substance pursuant to a lawful demand without lawful excuse has
been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
impaired operation
the details of the crashes were described in
the credible evidence of mr. chelliah and ms. westacott. they were sober at the
time and their evidence was confirmed by mr. chelliah’s dash camera videos
which captured the head-on collision with his car, and then the two further
collisions shown in the rear-facing camera. the video record shows there was no
apparent external reason for mr. vitellaro to cross the centre line and drive
into three oncoming vehicles.
constable korte provided credible detailed
evidence with the aid of notes made on the day of the incident. she arrived at
the crash scene after the fire department and ems ambulances.  she saw the
circumstances of the collisions and the severe damage to all four vehicles.
she spoke with mr. vitellaro. he was very
unsteady on his feet, unable to maintain his balance. when asked for his
driver’s license he first provided his health card. his eyelids were ‘droopy”
and he moved extremely slowly. he was slow to answer questions. she did not
smell alcohol on his breath. she began to consider arrest for impaired
operation by drug, but she waited for the medical assessment by ems to be
completed to rule out any possible medical reason for her observations. in
cross-examination she noted that mr. vitellaro’s mental state at trial was
different from the day of the incident.
constable wong met mr. vitellaro at the
scene and rode with him in the ambulance to the hospital. he also rode with mr.
vitellaro in the police car from the hospital to 5 district. his recollection
was assisted by detailed notes made at the time of the events. he described mr.
vitellaro’s speech at the scene as slow and very deliberate. he noted the
accused’s eye lids were drooping. mr. vitellaro was able to understand right to
counsel advice in the ambulance and did identify a lawyer he wished to speak
to. during the search of mr. vitellaro incident to arrest, p.c. wong found
blister packs of suboxone with mr. vitellaro’s name and the prescription date
of 24 july 2021, the day of the incident. after the search, mr. vitellaro
walked very slowly and had to balance himself on the side of the ems truck.
after a brief examination in the emergency department of markham stouffville
hospital mr. vitellaro was released as he was not in need of any medical
attention.
constable lam conducted the drug recognition
evaluation as described above.
mr. vitellaro’s statements to the evaluating
officer were not proved voluntary. the crown indicated at the outset of the
trial there was no issue that required a
voir dire.
any admission of drug consumption made after right to counsel advice
was provided but not proved voluntary is not admissible as evidence to prove any
count and will be disregarded. mr. vitellaro’s statements that are admissible
as further support for reasonable grounds for the demand are limited to that
purpose only.
mr. vitellaro’s dangerous driving errors,
lethargic and slow mental state, confusion producing documents at the roadside,
slow speech and the station video evidence all show significant impairment in
the mental faculties needed to safely operate a conveyance. that mental
impairment was further confirmed repeatedly during dre testing. the mental
slowness and impairment is not reasonably consistent with the effects of the
collisions, especially where mr. vitellaro was assessed and medically cleared
at hospital.
mr. vitellaro’s significant physical
difficulties with balance and simple movements showed impairment in the physical
ability to operate a conveyance. that conclusion was also confirmed during dre
testing.
constable lam testified that his testing led
to the conclusion that the cause of mr. vitellaro’s impairment was ingestion of
a narcotic analgesic drug. he explained that the many symptoms of impairment
observed were consistent with that type of drug but would not be found with
other types of drugs. his conclusion is supported by p.c. wong’s seizure of
suboxone from mr. vitellaro. constable lam testified that suboxone contains a
narcotic analgesic. it’s used in the treatment of opiate addiction.
the fact of mr. vitellaro’s refusal to
comply with the demand for bodily samples is admissible evidence on this count
and the court may draw an adverse inference to the accused from that evidence –
s 320.31(10). i decline to do that in this case as mr. vitellaro’s statements
at the time of refusal indicated that he chose to refuse not based on advice
the lawyer gave him that evening, but based on some dated legal information he obtained
in relation to some other matter. given his impaired mental state and the explanation
at that time i do not find it reasonable to infer that he chose to refuse in
order to avoid confirming the presence of drugs in his body.
mr. vitellaro conceded in his testimony that
suboxone can make a person drowsy. he explained that with his extended use of
suboxone at the time, over 8 or 9 years, it didn’t have that effect on him. he
may be right that the effect of that drug was no longer pronounced, but the
test is whether the crown has proved impairment by drug even to a slight
degree. mr. vitellaro chose to drive when he was exhausted. the evidence shows
the effect of suboxone at the time in his condition was significant and ongoing
well past the time of the collisions.
on the whole of the evidence, the only
reasonable inference is that in his exhausted state the consumption of a
narcotic analgesic was a significant contributing factor to the impairment in
mr. vitellaro’s ability to safely operate his conveyance. there is no credible evidence
that could reasonably leave a doubt in that regard.
charter s 11(b) – trial within a
reasonable time
mr. vitellaro alleged that his right to a
trial within a reasonable time was breached. this information was sworn on july
29
th
, 2021. on january 29, 2023 the case reached the 18-month mark.
i agree with mr. vitellaro that the delay requires examination.
the information 4911-998-21-91100805 records
the appearances to date and is the primary evidence mr. vitellaro refers to in
support of his application. the information shows the first appearance was
august 10
th
, 2021. there were 8 appearances to august 9, 2022 with
nothing happening. counsel mr. grossman was removed from the record on that
date. mr. vitellaro conceded in his testimony on the
charter
voir dire that this first year
of delay was caused by the defence as he considered different strategies to
deal with the charges to the point where he discharged his first lawyer.
there was further delay until november 3
rd
,
2022, when the matter was set for trial on october 30
th
and 31
st
,
2023 with mr. starkman’s office on record. that trial didn’t take place as the
defence brought an application to adjourn the trial the month prior on
september 11
th
, 2023. the application was granted, and the defence
waived s 11(b) (waived the right to complain about the delay they caused) to
the next trial date.
the matter was up to set a second trial date
on november 8
th
, 2023, but mr. starkman brought an application to be
removed as counsel which was granted. there was further delay until january 30
th
,
2024 when mr. vitellaro retained new counsel and was ready to set a second
trial date. november 12
th
and 13
th
, 2024 were chosen as
the dates for the second trial.
on april 2
nd
, 2024 a defence
application to vacate the second trial dates was granted. the judicial
endorsement on that date notes that “any delay that results is acknowledged to
be defence delay”. for some unknown reason new trial dates weren’t set until
may 29
th
when february 10
th
and 11
th
, 2025
were set as the third trial dates. on december 20
th
, 2024, an
application by counsel of record mr. tofilovski to be removed from the record
was granted. the trial was marked to proceed on february 10
th
, 2025
“with or without counsel”.
mr. vitellaro testified and submitted that
he did not delay the proceedings, the courts have delayed the matter. however,
the record shows that almost all of the delay in this matter has been caused by
the defence. once he was ready to set a date, he was given a trial date of
october 30
th
, 2023. we don’t know if the court had earlier dates,
but even if it was all institutional delay to the first trial date, the delay
was less than 12 months which is well within the guidelines for this court.
that trial was set during the active covid pandemic which extended the time to
trial and allowance for that factor would reduce the time attributable to
institutional delay.
after october 30
th
, 2023, all of
the delay has been caused by the defence in circumstances of express s 11(b)
waivers. even without those waivers, it’s plain that the delay that resulted is
attributable only to the defence. mr. vitellaro chose to explain the
difficulties he had with his various lawyers, but the delay arising from the
discharge of three counsel to the point where he ended up representing himself
cannot be attributed to the court system.
there’s no evidence of a breach of mr.
vitellaro’s right to a trial within a reasonable time. the application is
dismissed.
conclusion
there was no evidence of the s 10(b) breach
alleged by mr. vitellaro. the crown called evidence to show that the arrest,
search incident to arrest, dre demand and bodily samples demand were all based
on objectively reasonable grounds. most of the delay in this case was
attributable to the multiple changes in counsel and trial adjournments caused
by the defence. there was no evidence of a breach of mr. vitellaro’s
charter
rights.
the crown has proved all three charges
beyond a reasonable doubt. mr. vitellaro is found guilty of impaired operation
of a conveyance, dangerous operation and refusing to provide a bodily sample.
i invite the crown to make submissions as to
whether the two convictions for driving offences engage the rule prohibiting
multiple convictions for the same delict in the circumstances of this case.
delivered: april 11, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel