ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dimilta
, 2025 oncj 57
date:
2025 01 24
file #
2222712x
newmarket,
ontario
between:
his
majesty the king
respondent
— and
—
antonio dimilta
applicant
before
justice r.m. robinson
heard
on 13 december 2024
reasons
for judgment released on 24 january 2025
sandra quadrini........................................................................ counsel
for the respondent
the applicant antonio dimilta................................................................
on his own behalf
robinson j.:
introduction
on 8 february 2023, shortly after 8:33 am, p.c.
kwame agyei #1473 gave antonio dimilta (the applicant) an offence notice for failing
to stop at a stop sign, contrary to s.136(1)(a) of the
highway traffic act
[“
hta
”].
the matter was set down for trial on 31 may
2024. mr. dimilta made the strategic decision not to attend for his trial.
justice of the peace r. therrien convicted mr. dimilta in absentia and imposed
a fine of $85.00 plus costs, for a total amount of $110.00.
mr. dimilta appeals his conviction because of an
alleged error on the certificate of offence completed by p.c. agyei. he submits
that, despite his failure to appear for trial, justice of the peace therrien
was obliged to examine the certificate of offence pursuant to s.9.1(2) of the
provincial
offences act
[“
poa
”]; and that such an examination should have led
justice of the peace therrien to quash the proceeding under s.9.1(3)
poa
.
the issue in this case is whether justice of the
peace therrien ought to have concluded that the certificate of offence was not
“complete and regular on its face”, as required by s.9.1(2)
poa
.
philosophy of
the provincial
offences act
the purpose of the
poa
is set out in the
statute itself
and has been addressed repeatedly in the jurisprudence.
for example, in
r. v. davis
, the ontario
court of appeal commented on the
poa
’s philosophy being incompatible
with placing form over substance:
…the act is intended to permit judges to decide cases
on their merits, to deal efficiently and inexpensively with the province’s
large volume of minor regulatory offences, and to avoid having proceedings
invalidated because of technical objections or irregularities having no
prejudicial impact on a defendant
.
that philosophy was “intended to establish a
speedy, efficient and convenient method of dealing with offences.”
in r
. v. kwoon
, justice howden noted that
the arrival of the poa “introduced a procedure weighted toward dealing with
provincial offences on the merits in realistic, decisive terms rather than on formal
or procedural technicalities.”
default proceedings
where, as here, a defendant fails to appear at
trial, s.9.1(2)
poa
requires a justice to examine the certificate of offence
and enter a conviction “if the certificate is complete and regular on its
face.” if it is not complete and regular on its face, s.9.1(3)
poa
requires the justice to quash the proceeding.
of note, the jurisdiction of the justice to
amend a certificate of offence (set out in s.34
poa
), or to entertain a
motion to quash the certificate of offence (set out in s.36
poa
), does
not extend to the special powers and procedure conferred by s.9.1
poa
in
the case of default proceedings. as justice javed noted in
durham (regional municipality)
v. souvannarath
, “there is nothing improper about choosing to default for
“tactical” reasons if the certificate of offence is defective.”
“complete and regular on its face”
although this phrase is not defined by statute, the
courts have provided guidance on its proper interpretation. in
london (city)
v. young
, court of appeal for ontario held that, in determining if the certificate
was complete and regular on its face, “the justice is effectively determining whether
the defendant received effective notice of all the information needed to decide
whether to default.”
at issue in that appeal was the import of an incorrect
set fine amount on the certificate of offence. the court of appeal’s conclusion
that an incorrect set fine amount invalidated the certificate of offence was clearly
correct: without knowing the penalty one is facing, how could one make an
informed decision whether to contest the offence or to concede default?
however, not every deficiency or inaccuracy is
sufficient to invalidate a certificate of offence. in
chow v. york (regional
municipality)
, justice kenkel held that “[a] certificate of offence will
only be quashed on a s.9.1 review where there is potential prejudice to the
defendant in that he or she does not have the necessary information required in
order to decide how to proceed.”
along this line, justice kenkel further found
that where there is incorrect information that
has the potential to mislead
or cause prejudice to the defendant and her or his choice regarding default
,
the certificate is not regular and complete.
in
souvannarath
, justice javed found that
the concept of effective notice to enable a defendant to make an informed
choice as to whether to default went beyond simply knowing the case to meet –
it also implied an acknowledgment by the defendant that the state would be able
to secure a lawful conviction.
the alleged error
the offence notice issued by p.c. agyei, as well
as the certificate of offence placed before justice of the peace therrien, contained
the following information:
officer:                         agyei, kwame (#1473)
date:                           8 february 2023
time:                           8:33 a.m.
name:                           dimilta, antonio r.
address:                       79 goudie cres,
stouffville, ontario l4a 0l8
municipality:
stouffville
place of offence:           goudie cres / mostar st
municipality:
markham
offence:                       disobey stop sign –
fail to stop, s.136(1)(a) hta
set fine amount:            $85.00
total payable:               $110.00
mr. dimilta submits that the place of the
offence that is indicated is wrong, as the intersection of goudie crescent and
mostar street falls within the municipality of whitchurch-stouffville, not
markham. accordingly, he submits that the certificate of offence is not
“complete and regular on its face” and ought to have been quashed upon
inspection.
as noted by mr. dimilta in his supplementary
submissions, the role of a provincial offence appeal court is narrowly
circumscribed: i must assess the record that was before justice of the peace
therrien and determine if he erred by not concluding that the certificate of
offence was not “complete and regular on its face” and by not quashing it.
i have concluded that mr. dimilta’s argument
fails for several reasons.
first, on the record before justice of the peace
therrien, it was open to him to conclude that the intersection of goudie
crescent and mostar street was, in fact, in markham.
justice of the peace therrien could have
concluded that the address of 79 goudie crescent (which was
not
the
place of the offence and, therefore, was not an essential element) was
incorrectly noted as stouffville.
in the alternative, justice of the peace
therrien could have concluded that 79 goudie crescent was in stouffville, but
the exact location of the offence
near
the intersection of goudie
crescent and mostar street was in markham. as all adjacent municipalities have
a border, on one side of that border is one municipality and on the other side
is the other municipality. there was no reason for justice of the peace
therrien to question the possibility that 79 goudie crescent fell on one side
of the border and a location
near
the intersection of goudie crescent
and mostar street fell on the other side.
that the applicant now submits (and the
respondent appears to concede) that the location of the offence was actually in
stouffville, not markham, is of no moment because that information was not
before justice of the peace therrien. there was no basis for him to conclude
that markham was an error. simply put, my role as
poa
appeal judge does
not involve playing monday morning quarterback.
in
souvannarath
, justice javed quite
correctly found that “out of area” was not a municipality and was, therefore,
wrong. in the present case, there was no reason for justice of the peace
therrien to find that “markham” was not a municipality or was the wrong
municipality.
second, in determining if the certificate of
offence was “complete and regular on its face”, justice of the peace therrien
was obliged to consider if the information contained therein had the potential
to mislead or cause prejudice to the defendant.
the totality of the information before justice
of the peace therrien included the following:
•
mr. dimilta resided on goudie crescent.
•
the alleged offence took place near the
intersection of goudie crescent and mostar street. presumably, mr. dimilta was
intimately familiar with that location.
•
p.c. agyei served mr. dimilta with the offence
notice at the scene of the alleged offence. there could, therefore, be no confusion
about where the offence allegedly occurred.
•
the back of the offence notice provided a trial option
at the ontario court of justice in newmarket in the regional municipality of
york.
on the totality of the information before
justice of the peace therrien, there was no basis for him to conclude that there
was any reason for mr. dimilta to have been misled or prejudiced.
third, and lastly, there is no question that the
regional
municipality is correct, as both
local
municipalities,
markham and stouffville, fall within the regional municipality of york.
in
souvannarath
, justice javed noted that
the trial was held in durham region while the offence allegedly occurred in york
region, unlike in
matzov
, where the examination “was conducted within
the jurisdiction of the court where the offence took place.”
the potential for ms. souvannarath to be misled
or prejudiced was evident. she was stopped on highway 407, west of keele street
in the city of vaughan, within the regional municipality of york. and yet her
offence notice directed her to attend for trial in a completely different
regional municipality, the regional municipality of durham. understandably, ms.
souvannarath would believe there was some sort of mix-up, as the alleged
offence was nowhere near the regional municipality of durham.
at the time of the hearing of this appeal, on 13
december 2024, i asked mr. dimilta for submissions on the import, if any, of an
erroneous local municipality. the written submissions that i subsequently
received from him were of no assistance.
conclusion
the comments of justice nakatsuru (then of the
ontario court of justice) in
r. v. tang
(regarding the officer omitting
to indicate “a.m.” or “p.m.” on the offence notice) are apposite to the present
case:
it is a far-fetched argument to suggest that the appellant
was or could have reasonably been misled by this technical omission. there
could only realistically be two possible times in which this offence could have
been committed; a time in the late afternoon and a time in the very early
morning. it would be readily apparent which was being alleged against the
appellant. the omission was highly technical and could not have caused any
prejudice. in my opinion, this certificate of offence was complete and regular
on its face and there was no error in entering a conviction
.
in the present case, i am not satisfied that the
totality of the evidence before justice of the peace therrien should have led
him to conclude that the certificate of offence was not complete and regular on
its face.
i find that there was no basis to conclude that the
certificate of offence contained erroneous information, let alone erroneous
information that created the potential to mislead or prejudice mr. dimilta.
mr. dimilta’s appeal is dismissed.
released:  24 january 2025
justice
r.m. robinson
s.2(1): the purpose of this act is to replace the summary conviction procedure
for the prosecution of provincial offences, including the provisions adopted by
reference to the
criminal code (canada)
, with a procedure that reflects the distinction
between provincial offences and criminal offences.
r. v. davis
,
2017 onca 45
, at para
49
.
r. v. jamieson
,
1981 canlii 3223 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 1937 (c.a.), at para
5
.
r. v. kwoon
,
o.j. no. 4989 (s.c.j.), at para 13
. see also justice
o’neill’s decision in
york (regional municipality) v. abadehee
,
o.j. no. 918 (s.c.j.), at para 14
.
durham (regional municipality) v. souvannarath
,
2019 oncj 177
, at para
11
.
corporation of the city of london v. young et al
(2008),
2008 onca 429 (canlii)
, 91 o.r. (3d)
215 (c.a.), at para
29
.
chow v. york (regional municipality)
,
2018 oncj 818
, at para
7
.
chow
, supra
, at para
9
.
souvannarath
, supra
, at para
18
.
souvannarath
, supra
, at para
24
.
r. v. tang
,
2016 oncj 627
, at para
3
.