warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code
.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)   any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)   two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)   at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)   on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  offence
— (1)  every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. tapia plata
,
2025 oncj 423
date:  2025 08 14
ontario
court of justice
toronto
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and  —
gerardo tapia plata
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
the crown
a.
nash
for
the defendant
s.
yeghoyan
heard:  may 29, 30; june 10
2024
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction
mr. tapia plata (the defendant) is charged
with a single count of sexual assault on s.v. arising out of an incident
alleged to have occurred on january 21, 2024.
the defendant was staying with his brother, erick
trujillo plata (erick) in an apartment on lippincott street in toronto. on the
evening in question, s.v., and some of her friends, including the defendant, erick,
and erick’s girlfriend, alexis, went to a local bar to celebrate s.v.’s
birthday. s.v. got quite intoxicated and decided to spend the night on the
couch in erick’s apartment, which he shared with alexis.
s.v. alleges that while she was lying on the
couch, recovering from having vomited from too much alcohol consumption, the
defendant twice ran his hand up her leg and under her shorts without her consent.
the crown proceeded summarily, and the
defendant pleaded not guilty.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction
s.v. testified for the prosecution. the
defendant and his brother testified for the defence.
some text messages between s.v. and her
friend, sent at or around the time of the alleged sexual assault were put into
evidence.
i shall not set out the evidence in detail. a
transcript of the evidence is readily available. rather i shall summarize the
evidence with emphasis on the salient aspects of the witnesses’ testimony.
(b)
s.v.’s account
s.v. was acquainted with the defendant,
having met him several times when s.v., her best friend alexis, and alexis’s
boyfriend, erick (the defendant’s brother) had gone out together. she did not
know the defendant’s name on the evening in question.
she and her friends gathered at erick’s
apartment before they all left to go to hush hush, a nearby club. s.v. consumed
three alcoholic drinks in the hour or so before they set out around 11:00 pm.
they stayed at the club until 2:30 am the
next day. s.v. consumed eight alcoholic drinks at the club. she was extremely
intoxicated when they left the club to return to erick’s apartment – so much so
that she needed help from her friends in walking, although she was “aware of
where she was going”.
once back at the basement apartment, her
friends alexis and camilla laid her on a couch and brought her water, pizza,
and a plastic bag to throw up into in case she got sick. she ate some pizza,
drank some water, and dozed off.
she then awoke and without leaving the
couch, vomited into the bag. she did not see the defendant at that time. alexis
and camilla were still nearby.
camilla announced that she was leaving, and
alexis went off to sleep in her room which was on the other side of the wall
that the couch was against. s.v. dozed off again.
she awoke again feeling sick. the defendant
was beside her holding back her hair as she again vomited into the plastic bag.
s.v. dozed off again five minutes later.
while dozing off this time she felt the defendant’s hands reaching under her
blanket. the defendant ran his hands up her leg “towards [her] butt”. she only
partially opened her eyes but did recognize the defendant. neither he nor she
said anything. the lights of the apartment were off, and it was dark.
s.v. made some jerking movements and he
stopped touching her. soon after, the defendant began touching her the same way,
but this time got his hands as far up as to be under her underwear close to her
vagina. again, her eyes were partially shut yet she could see it was the
defendant. he had a cell phone in his other hand. the lights in the apartment
were still off.
the defendant soon stopped and went to the
washroom. s.v., still on the couch, took out her phone and texted her friend
carlos, who was in morocco at the time. her text was to the effect that the
defendant was taking pictures of her. three minutes later the defendant left
the washroom and s.v. immediately went into the washroom and locked herself in.
she continued to exchange text messages with carlos. they spoke on the phone as
well.
s.v. also phoned her mother from the
bathroom. alexis then came to the bathroom. she told s.v. that she had received
calls from s.v.’s mother and from carlos. eventually s.v.’s father came to the
apartment and took s.v. to the police station.
when asked why she didn’t call out to her
best friend alexis in the nearby bedroom instead of texting her friend in
morrocco s.v. said she feared the defendant and did not want to make noise. she
admitted that she had alexis’s phone number on her phone. she also chose to
text carlos because she knew he would be awake in morrocco’s time zone.
(c)
erick’s version of events
erick attended the party at hush hush. he
testified that he does not drink yet he also testified that he had three drinks
over the course of the evening. he saw s.v. drink a lot and, according to him,
she “behaved poorly”. the defendant does not drink alcohol and did not drink at
all that night.
s.v. vomited “more than five times” after
returning to the apartment.  her vomiting started in the bathroom and continued
on the couch. after she was done vomiting, she fell asleep on the couch. he
watched as the defendant went to his room and closed his door. then he and
alexis turned off the lights and went to their room. when the lights are off, the
apartment is very dark.
all he heard after that was s.v. going to
the washroom.
erick described himself as a light sleeper.
he believed he would have heard the defendant’s door open if the defendant had
left his room after he went to bed. he heard no such thing.
at some point carlos called alexis’s phone
and erick answered. carlos was angry but erick could not understand why. carlos
said that s.v.’s parents were on their way to pick her up. erick understood
that carlos was alleging some impropriety on the part of the defendant towards
s.v. erick woke up his brother to find out what the commotion was all about.
the defendant told him he had been sleeping and had no idea what the problem
was.
(d)
the defendant’s version of events
the defendant went
to hush hush with the group. he had nothing alcoholic to drink that night. s.v.
got very drunk that night. she began vomiting in the living room then vomited
further in the bathroom after returning to the apartment. she then continued
vomiting on the couch.
alexis and camilla
were helping s.v. while the defendant cleaned up then went to bed after
escorting camilla to her uber. he had nothing to do with s.v. while she vomited
and did not touch her.
erick woke him up
and told him about carlos’s allegations which he denied.
c.
analysis
(a)
introduction
this case turns principally on the
credibility and reliability of the three witnesses, and because the defendant
testified and denied the alleged offence, i must thus apply the rule in
r.
v. w.d.
,
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
, s.c.j. no. 26, which can be summarized as follows: if i
believe the testimony of the defendant, i must of course find him not guilty.
even if i am not convinced by his testimony, it may nonetheless, when examined
in the context of all the evidence, raise a reasonable doubt. if it does, i
must also find the defendant not guilty. if it does not raise a reasonable
doubt, i must examine the evidence that i do accept to see if it proves the criminal
allegation against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. if it does not, the
defendant must be acquitted. if it does, he must be found guilty.
(b)
the credibility and reliability of the witnesses
and their accounts
the defendant’s testimony was delivered in a
calm and succinct manner. nothing in his in-chief testimony or his
cross-examination leads me to doubt his credibility.
erick’s testimony is not particularly
helpful. according to him, he went to bed before the incident is alleged to
have taken place. i do not accept the accuracy of his belief that if the
defendant had assaulted s.v. he, erick, would have heard the defendant leave
his room. there are simply too many vagaries surrounding what will or will not
waken a person in any particular circumstances on any particular night.
s.v.’s testimony was delivered in a calm and
articulate fashion.  nothing in her testimony leads me to doubt her
credibility. she was not seeking to mislead the court. she honestly recounted
what she believes occurred that evening.
it is the reliability of s.v.’s account that
suffers. i accept her assertion that someone touched her inappropriately. it is
difficult to imagine that, despite her intoxication, she would incorrectly perceive
the nature of the alleged touching. it is her identification of the defendant
that is suspect. she claims to have identified the defendant as the perpetrator
while the basement lights were off, the room was dark, her eyes were half
closed, and she was extremely intoxicated.
the defendant was not the only person in the
apartment who had the opportunity to commit the offence. while erick was not
asked by defence counsel whether he committed the offence (for reasons that are
obvious; he is the defendant’s brother), i am of the view (and both counsel
agree) that that does not prevent me from considering him a possible
alternative suspect, in so far as the accuracy of s.v.’s identification is
concerned. the same can be said of alexis who did not testify.
this is not a case like
r. v. j.j.r.d.
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 4749 (c.a.) where, despite the lack of any badges of
incredibility attaching to the testimony of the defendant, the overwhelmingly
cogent evidence of the complainant carried the day.
s.v.’s identification of the defendant is
uncorroborated and took place under conditions that undermine the strength of
that identification.
d.
conclusion
the reliability concerns surrounding s.v.’s
identification along with the lack of indicia of testimonial incredibility on
the part of the defendant leave me with a reasonable doubt that the defendant
committed the alleged crime. the crown has thus not met its burden of proof.
the charge is dismissed.
released on august 14,
2025
justice russell
silverstein
this statement of the defendant was led by the crown on erick’s
cross-examination. it is thus admissible for its truth.