ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. maiato
, 2025 oncj 186
date:  march
8, 2025
court
file no.:  brampton 998 23 31110559
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
keith maiato
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 04-05 march 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 08 march 2025
l. eikelboom............................................................................. counsel
for the prosecution
r. sahota.............................................................. counsel
for the defendant keith maiato
reasons for judgment on the charter
applications and the trial
renwick j.:
introduction
the defendant is charged with the two standard drink-driving offences.
in advance of the trial, the defendant brought a
charter
application for alleged violations of his ss. 8 and 9 rights. the parties
agreed to proceed with the trial and the
charter
application
concurrently. the voluntariness of admissions made by the defendant to the
qualified technician was also litigated within this “blended” forensic
environment. during final submissions, the defendant pleaded a s. 10(a)
charter
violation. the prosecutor took no issue with the timing of this last-minute
argument.
in the following random order, the prosecution called three police
witnesses: police constables obiadullah said (the arresting officer), michael
babore (the qualified technician), and bryan carroll (the first police officer
who dealt with the defendant).
the issues for determination are whether the
defendant’s
charter
rights were violated, and if so, what, if any, evidence
should be excluded from the defendant’s trial. on the trial proper, the defendant’s
utterances must be proven voluntary to establish his identity as the possibly
impaired driver. once the entire evidential landscape is cleared, i will determine
if the two charges have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
applicable
legal principles
though the defendant generally has the onus to
establish violations of the
charter
on a balance of probabilities,
where there is a warrantless
search, as in this case, the prosecutor must establish that the search was
conducted reasonably and pursuant to some lawful authority.
thus, both parties have an
onus: the defendant must prosecute his
charter
claims that the police
had failed to advise him of the reason for his detention and that he had been
arbitrarily detained and/or his arrest was arbitrary; while the prosecutor has
to establish that the seizure of the evidential breath samples followed a
lawful arrest and breath demand, and otherwise complied with the statutory
regime.
obtaining reasonable grounds to believe that an
offence has been committed does not demand perfection or even perfect accuracy.
police officers embarking on an investigation are entitled to be wrong. as long
as their grounds are objectively reasonable, rather than based on vague
suspicions, intuitions, hunches, or worse, improper motives, they need not be
found to be correct.
the standard of reasonable grounds to believe is
credibly-based probability.
alternative explanations for observed signs of possible alcohol-related
impairment do not undermine reasonable grounds, unless the officer unreasonably
discounted information of which she was aware.  reasonable grounds to believe
an offence has been committed must be articulable, subjectively held by the
officer, and objectively reasonable.
an officer is entitled to rely on hearsay, unless there is reason to doubt the
information’s truth.
reasonable grounds are not proof on a balance of
probabilities, but they involve being satisfied of the probability of a state
of affairs. the officer can be mistaken in the belief, as long as her belief is
reasonable and there was no reason for her to doubt the information she
believed.
the ontario court of appeal affirmed these principles in
r
. v.
notaro
:
the reasonable and probable
grounds test is not about the quality of the investigation or the range of the
questions the officer asks herself. it turns on whether an arresting officer's
honest, subjective belief that an offence has been committed is supported by
the objective facts that the officer was aware of:
r. v.
bush
,
2010 onca 554
,
101 o.r. (3d) 641
,
at paras.
71-72
. as durno j.
(sitting
ad hoc
)
noted in
bush
,
at para.
70
, "the issue is not whether the officer could have conducted a
more thorough investigation. the issue is whether, when the officer made the
breath demand, he subjectively and objectively had reasonable and probable
grounds to do so."
this is
not to say that the quality of the investigation will have no practical bearing
on whether the arresting officer has reasonable and probable grounds. after
all, the nature and quality of the investigation will affect the information
that the officer has, and can therefore indirectly influence the sufficiency of
the officer's grounds. the point is that the material focus in a reasonable and
probable grounds analysis is not on the extent of the investigation that an
officer goes through in forming her belief. the material focus is on what the
information known to the officer would mean to a reasonable person.
relatedly, our court of appeal considered the
standard for a warrantless arrest in
r.
v
. carelse-brown
,
o.j. no. 6564
. at paragraph 28 of
carelse-brown
, the court quoted from
its decision in
r.
v
. golub
:
in
determining whether the reasonableness standard is met, the nature of the power
exercised and the context within which it is exercised must be considered. the
dynamics at play in an arrest situation are very different than those which
operate on an application for a search warrant. often, the officer's decision
to arrest must be made quickly in volatile and rapidly changing situations.
judicial reflection is not a luxury the officer can afford. the officer must
make his or her decision based on available information which is often less
than exact or complete. the law does not expect the same kind of inquiry of a
police officer deciding whether to make an arrest that it demands of a justice
faced with an application for a search warrant.
the law respecting the obligation of the police
to inform individuals of the reason for their detention is well settled.
ordinarily, the start of an investigative detention engages an individual’s s.
10(a)
charter
right to know the reason for the state’s interference with
one’s autonomy or liberty. information about the reason for one’s detention permits
detainees the opportunity to choose whether or not to submit to a detention or
arrest.
breaches of s. 10(a)
can be "temporal" or "informational". a temporal breach
occurs if a detained person is not
promptly
informed of the reason for
their detention. an "informational" breach arises if the reason for
detention is not adequately communicated.
by way of a roadmap, it will be helpful to
outline the
charter
arguments at play, the evidence and my findings, how
the law intersects with the facts, and my conclusions on the
charter
applications, the voluntariness
voir dire
, and the trial proper.
positions
of the parties on the charter applications
the defendant alleged that several
charter
violations occurred during the investigation of the defendant leading to his
arrest and a demand for evidential breath sampling. the ss. 8 and 9
charter
arguments were framed in the
grounds
section of the application as follows:
1.
the applicant submits p.c. said did not have
reasonable grounds to arrest the applicant for impaired operation. there were
insufficient indicia of impairment to support the low threshold of reasonable
and probable grounds. therefore, the applicant was unlawfully and arbitrarily
arrested contrary to sections 8 and 9 of the charter;
2.
p.c. said observed no prior driving behaviour
and the second-hand hearsay information he received from the police dispatch
was insufficient to arrest for impaired operation;
3.
p.c. said’s purportedly observed indicia of
impairment included unsteadiness of the applicant’s feet. the applicant
respectfully disagrees with that characterization.
…
5.
the applicant further submits that p.c. said
demanded samples of the applicant’s breath after the applicant had been
arbitrarily detained.
…
7.
the search and seizure was conducted in an
unreasonable manner as no police officer ever cautioned the applicant or his
mother that he was under investigation for impaired operation or cautioned them
that their statements could be used against them.
8.
the decision to arrest the applicant was
arbitrary and without legal justification in violation of the applicant’s
section 8 and 9 charter rights against unreasonable search and seizure and
arbitrary detention.
9.
p.c. said conducted an impermissible shortcut in
arresting the applicant instead of opting to conduct a roadside sobriety test.
…
orally, the defendant submitted that the police
breached s.10(a) of the
charter
when they attended his residence and failed
to immediately advise the defendant of the reason for their presence and the defendant’s
possible jeopardy (a criminal investigation related to drinking and driving).
the prosecutor responded that there would have
been no doubt in the defendant’s mind why the police were present once they asked
him if he had been drinking and if he had been driven his mother’s car.
also, there were ample reasonable grounds to
believe that the defendant had been involved in a drink-driving offence as the
police were armed with a complaint of poor driving, the defendant’s (and his
mother’s) information that he had been the driver observed, the defendant’s
admission of recent alcohol consumption, coupled with the officer’s personal observations
of the defendant’s lack of sobriety.
the
evidence and findings
the testimony of p.c. obiadullah
said
constable said was a candid, reliable witness. almost
all of his testimony is supported by the body-worn camera (“bwc”) footage (both
his and p.c. carroll’s – exhibits 3 and 5, respectively), the testimony of the
qualified technician (p.c. babore), and the breath room video (exhibit #4).
at 9:40 p.m. on the night in question, p.c. said
received the radio call of a “possibly” impaired driver. he was told of a
particular vehicle and license plate that was “swerving” and “hitting the
curb.” along with other officers, and relying on the license plate information,
he attended the registered owner’s address, which was the defendant’s mother’s
home. already on scene when he arrived were p.c. carroll and sergeant robinson.
the sound for his bwc (which has a 30 second delay from the start of the
recording) activated just prior to the defendant’s arrival (from inside) to the
front door of the residence. the defendant first stood about two steps away
from the open door. over the next almost two minutes, the following exchange
took place:
p.c. carroll: hey
man, how you doin’? come out and chat with us for a second please. how you
feelin’ tonight?
defendant: not
bad, you?
p.c. carroll: i’m
alright. anything to drink tonight?
defendant: a bit.
p.c. carroll: ya?
were you driving that car right there [looking in the direction of the suspect
vehicle]?
defendant: ya.
p.c. carroll:
okay. great. come out and ah, just throw some shoes on for me, buddy, let’s
have a chat out here. please and thanks.
[the defendant
walks inside. he opens the hall closet and closes it.]
defendant’s
mother: …put your boots on.
[defendant
declines inaudibly and makes a hand gesture. he walks back outside and attempts
to close the front door.]
defendant’s
mother: no, no, i’m gonna listen to this.
p.c. said: you
wanna come over here, so you don’t fall?
[the defendant
walks down the front steps toward p.c. said.]
p.c. said: so
what’s going on today?
defendant:
nothin’, just at home [unintelligible].
p.c. said: you
said you had a couple drinks?
defendant: a
couple drinks, ya.
p.c. said: ya,
when was your last drink?
defendant: what
was the last drink?
p.c. said:
when
was your last drink?
defendant: ah,
about an hour ago.
p.c. said: about an
hour ago?
defendant: ya.
p.c. said: were
you driving that car right there?
defendant: ya.
p.c. said: that
one right there?
defendant: ya.
p.c. said: the
hyundai?
defendant: ya.
p.c. said: okay.
you don’t seem like you’re too steady on your feet right now, brother.
defendant: no.
p.c. said: you
were kinda swaying over there, too.
defendant: why?
what’s the problem.
p.c. said: the
problem is, we’ve got multiple…complaints. you were driving, you were hitting
the curbs as well. we have reason to believe that you may be impaired while you
were driving that vehicle.
defendant: okay.
p.c. said: from
what i’m seeing, right now, you’re not giving me too much confidence that
you’re not impaired.
defendant: [unintelligible]
p.c. said: so
you’re telling me you had one drink?
defendant: i had a
couple.
p.c. said: you had
a couple?
defendant: ya.
p.c. said: okay,
listen. put your hands behind your back. [the defendant turns around.] come on.
right now you’re under arrest for driving a motor vehicle impaired. okay? you
don’t have to say anything to me right now. anything that you do say can be
used as evidence. and you do have a right to a lawyer, okay? just come with me.
constable said testified that he smelled alcohol
on the defendant’s breath when they briefly spoke. he also observed that the
defendant’s eyes were glossy and the defendant was not standing still. it
appeared that the defendant had “no strong sense of balance.” his speech was
also slurred. at 9:57 p.m., constable said arrested the defendant as he had
formed the opinion that when the defendant drove his mom’s car his ability to
drive was impaired by alcohol. the officer testified that he usually provides
arrestees with an informal caution and information about their rights to
counsel because “most people” do not know their rights and they “may say
something” they would not if they are made aware of their rights.
i find that p.c. said was very credible and
reliable as a witness. almost all of what he told the court was confirmed when
watching the bwc and breath room videos. it is also notable that this witness
testified that he had not seen his bwc video prior to testifying. overall, his
memory was very good.
there was really only one apparent contradiction
with the officer’s testimony and the bwc video. constable said did not believe
that the fourth officer, p.c. jameel brown, had any interaction with the
defendant. the bwc video showed this officer assisted with the pat-down search
of the defendant and he helped the defendant to put on his boots before
entering the police car.
i find that p.c. said was at all times professional
and respectful in his interactions with the defendant. there is no doubt that
he was also casual and informal. he referred to the defendant as “brother,” but
this was likely done to build rapport or to empathize with the defendant who
was very cooperative and candid with the police. when discussing the
defendant’s apparent remorse in the breath room, p.c. said testified in chief,
“to be honest, i felt bad for him as well.”
counsel for the defendant suggested that the bwc
footage contradicts several of the officer’s observations that formed the basis
for his opinion. issue was taken with the following observations: the lack of
balance, swaying, glossy eyes, and slurred speech. respectfully, counsel is
mistaken. in watching both bwc videos, it is obvious that the defendant was
walking very intentionally and slowly. he was touching the door frame when
entering the house and the pillar when descending the front steps. the cadence
of his movements was irregular. i find on the basis of the videos that p.c.
said’s observations and testimony are reasonable interpretations of the
defendant’s physical demeanor and behaviour. i accept that watching these
videos is less than ideal and not the same as seeing the defendant in person. for
these reasons, i accept p.c. said’s testimony respecting his observations of
the defendant.
at one point, p.c. brown indirectly illuminated
the defendant’s face with his flashlight. this is seconds before the
defendant’s arrest. this also confirmed that the defendant’s eyes were “glossy”
or watery. as for slurred speech, the defendant’s answer to p.c. said’s first
question, “so what’s going on today?” was almost completely unintelligible
because of the defendant’s slurred speech. that is why i am unable to detect
(and transcribe) the defendant’s complete response. there were other examples where
the defendant’s speech seemed slurred, as well.
cross-examination also focussed on whether the
defendant was detained. p.c. said was candid, “i hadn’t made up my mind at the
time. i hadn’t made that decision” (that the defendant was under an
investigative detention) before the arrest. he testified that this lack of
certainty (at the time) explained why he provided no caution or rights to
counsel before the defendant’s arrest. cross-examination also revealed that
p.c. said was an inexperienced officer at that time. even so, his knowledge of
the difference between reasonable suspicion and reasonable grounds to believe an
offence had taken place was satisfactory.
the cross-examination ended with p.c. said
admitting that he had made a mistake by not cautioning the defendant when he
first spoke with him. while this evidence was generous and gratuitous it is not
dispositive of the s. 10(a) issue. rather, i see this as another indicator that
this officer was conscientious and he wanted to give every benefit afforded by
our constitution to his detainees.
the testimony
of qualified technician, d.c. michael babore
this witness was credible and reliable at all
times. his evidence corroborated some of the physical observations of the
defendant provided by p.c. said (strong odour of alcohol on his breath, watery
eyes, his coordination was off, he was walking slowly, trying not to fall, and
he had slightly slurred speech), which in turn corroborated this witness’
observations. all of his testimony was corroborated by his certificate, the
test record card for the approved instrument, the testimony of p.c. said, and
the breath room video.
the breath room video became exhibit #4. the
video depicted that detective constable babore introduced himself to the
defendant and advised he could call him “mike” and asked how the defendant wished
to be addressed. he then explained that the room was audio and video recorded
(“no secrets here.”). d.c. babore then confirmed that the defendant did not
have a lawyer of his own, but he had spoken with duty counsel. he also
confirmed, without getting into a discussion of privileged discussions, that
the defendant understood what was said by duty counsel. next, d.c. babore
cautioned the defendant in respect of the two charges he may be facing and that
he was not obliged to say anything in answer to the charges and anything he
said may be given in evidence. he also read the defendant a secondary caution
(anything said to the defendant by any other person in authority should not
influence the defendant to make a statement). then the breath demand was given
during the following exchange:
d.c. babore:
so, next. ah, so, i’m demanding you provide samples of your breath that in a
qualified technician’s opinion will enable a proper analysis to be made by this
approved instrument and you accompany me now for this purpose.
defendant: yes
sir.
d.c. babore: do
you understand that?
defendant: yep.
d.c. babore.
okay. so i just wanna make it clear what i read right there, that’s a lawful
demand. so, like in the eyes of the court, what it means is that if that if you
fail or refuse to take part in any part of this evaluation, you could be
charged with an additional charge or refusal. so it’s an additional criminal
charge to refuse or fail this. do you understand that?
defendant: yes
sir.
the qualified technician was cross-examined
about this. he was asked if a detainee has to answer his questions. the
qualified technician correctly answered that a breath sampling subject is under
no obligation to answer questions during the breath testing procedure. he was
further questioned about the word choice, “
this evaluation
.” the witness
answered the evaluation includes “all of it.”
when asked if d.c. babore asked questions about driving
that night in order to elicit evidence, he testified that the purpose was “to
get the truth out.”
detective constable babore did not believe that
the defendant would be confused into answering his questions as part of the required
“evaluation,” because the defendant answered that he understood, “right away”
and if he was confused he would have asked for clarification.
the
testimony of p.c. bryan carroll
like the other witnesses, i had no concerns
about the credibility or reliability of this witness. he is an experienced
police officer and he seemed fairly relaxed while testifying.
during cross-examination, p.c. carroll was quick
to note that this investigation was not necessarily about an impaired driver, because
there could be other explanations for the driving that was reported to the
police.
this witness was clear during cross-examination
that he did not consider the defendant to be detained when they spoke. he
testified that after he had asked about drinking and whether the defendant had
been driving “that car,” he had asked the defendant to step outside and the
defendant then went down the steps and dealt with p.c. said.
constable carroll was specifically asked if he
would have stopped the defendant if he had simply walked back inside the home. he
answered, “no. i don’t think so. it was very calm” and in his view everyone was
cooperating and compliant.
analysis
there
was no breach of s. 10(a) of the charter
section 10(a) of the
charter
requires the
state to “promptly” notify individuals when they are arrested or detained and
the reason(s) for same. this permits an individual to make an informed decision
whether or not to submit to the arrest or detention. it is also important
information in the context of exercising the concomitant right to counsel.
obviously, the pre-condition for provision of the
informational component of the s. 10 right is a detention or arrest.
in
r
. v.
suberu
, the supreme court
discussed the threshold issue (was there a detention):
in
grant
,
we adopted a purposive approach to the definition of "detention" and
held that a "detention" for the purposes of the
charter
refers to a suspension of an individual's
liberty interest by virtue of a significant physical or psychological restraint
at the hands of the state. the recognition that detention can manifest in both
physical and psychological form is consistent with our acceptance that police
actions short of holding an individual behind bars or in handcuffs can be
coercive enough to engage the rights protected by ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
.
while a detention is clearly
indicated by the existence of physical restraint or a legal obligation to
comply with a police demand, a detention can also be grounded when police
conduct would cause a reasonable person to conclude that he or she no longer
had the freedom to choose whether or not to cooperate with the police. as
discussed more fully in
grant,
this is
an objective determination, made in light of the circumstances of an encounter
as a whole.
the court in
suberu
also relied upon a
portion of its earlier decision in
r.
v
. mann
:
"detention" has been held to cover, in canada, a
broad range of encounters between police officers and members of the public.
even so,
the police cannot be said to "detain", within the
meaning of ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
, every
suspect they stop for purposes of identification, or even interview
.
the person who is stopped will in all cases be "detained" in the
sense of "delayed", or "kept waiting". but the constitutional
rights recognized by ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
are
not engaged by delays that involve no significant physical or psychological
restraint. [original emphasis]
the defendant submits that there was a detention
when he was questioned about alcohol consumption and driving, in the two
minutes prior to his arrest. respectfully, i disagree.
the only evidence before the court came from the
two of the four police officers who were present who actually interacted with
the defendant. while it is not dispositive, it is instructive that both p.c.’s
carroll and said testified that they did not consider that the defendant was
detained when they were asking him questions at his home. several facts support
their evidence:
i.
the defendant was politely asked to come outside
to speak with the police (“hey man, how you doin’? come out and chat with us
for a second please.”);
ii.
the defendant was first asked how he was
“feeling tonight;”
iii.
the defendant was then asked if he had consumed
any alcohol;
iv.
the defendant was then asked if he had driven
the car that had been observed and reported to police;
v.
the defendant was then told, “come out and ah,
just throw some shoes on for me, buddy, let’s have a chat out here. please and
thanks;”
vi.
the defendant then left the front porch and went
inside his house, very briefly. he opened the front closet. he then dismissed
his mother’s request to wear the boots visible just inside the front door, then
he returned to the front porch after deciding not to put on any footwear. as he
exited, he began to close the front door behind him, but his mother prevented
that from happening;
vii.
the defendant was then asked by p.c. said, “so,
you wanna come over here so you don’t fall” […off the porch, which was raised but
which had no guardrails];
viii.
after the defendant descended the steps and
approached p.c. said, he was again asked, “so what’s going on today;” and
ix.
just prior to his arrest, the defendant was
asked to confirm that he had said that he had consumed alcohol, he was asked
when his last drink was, and he was asked to confirm that he had been driving
the reported vehicle.
the first four points above are clearly
exploratory in nature. constable carroll needed to ascertain, as his evidence
suggested, whether the defendant was the driver of the vehicle that was reported
to police and whether there was some explanation for the poor driving.
the fifth and sixth observations above support
the credibility finding that p.c.’s carroll and said had not intended to detain
the defendant when they initially questioned him. not only was he free to walk
away, (which he did when invited to get his shoes), i find that the defendant did
not have to come outside or even speak with the police at all.  throughout
their brief interaction before his arrest, i find that the defendant was free
to walk back into his house and close the door.
items vii., viii., and ix. above mirror points i. through iv., for
p.c. said. i have no difficulty with him repeating the questions and
ascertaining that he had properly understood the defendant’s answers. this was
especially important because he took over the investigation and he formed the
opinion which generated the defendant’s arrest.
i find that until p.c. said remarked, “okay. you
don’t seem like you’re too steady on your feet right now, brother,”
which is approximately one minute and a few seconds after the defendant first
attended the front door, the defendant was not detained. the police were
exploring who had been driving and whether there were explanations besides
alcohol impairment that could account for the call to police.
at this point, i find that p.c. said made it clear what they were
investigating and why there was concern with the defendant:
p.c. said: okay.
you don’t seem like you’re too steady on your feet right now, brother.
defendant: no.
p.c. said: you
were kinda swaying over there, too.
defendant: why?
what’s the problem.
p.c. said: the
problem is, we’ve got multiple…complaints. you were driving, you were hitting
the curbs as well. we have reason to believe that you may be impaired while you
were driving that vehicle.
defendant: okay.
for these reasons, there was no initial
detention and no need for the police to inform the defendant why they had
questions of him. once the detention had crystallized, p.c. said promptly
informed the defendant of his concerns and the reason for their interaction.
this fulfilled the informational component of s. 10(a) and it was delivered promptly
once the defendant’s detention began.
there was no evidence that before this point the
defendant was psychologically detained or that a reasonable person in his
circumstances would have felt compelled to participate in the police
investigation.
i agree with the submissions that there were no
less than four uniformed police officers present, however, the initial interactions
with the police were cordial and generalized and it is obvious from the bwc
videos that the defendant made several choices about where to stand, where he
wanted to go, how to answer, and the level of cooperation he wanted to exhibit.
he may have had tactical reasons for his apparent cooperation (perhaps there
was an expectation of leniency). regardless, i am unable to conclude that there
was a detention prior to the comment about the defendant’s balance.
as a result, i am not satisfied that it is
proven on a balance of probabilities that s. 10(a) of the
charter
was
violated.
there was no breach of s. 9 of the charter
there was much discussion between the court and
the defendant’s counsel during the submissions about the nature of reasonable grounds
to believe that an offence had been committed by the defendant.
i agree with the defendant that without the
defendant’s admission that he had driven the hyundai vehicle, p.c. said did not
personally have reasonable grounds to arrest the defendant. constable said was
not present when the defendant’s mother had told p.c. carroll that her son had
been out with her vehicle since that morning. this supports my view that it was
appropriate for the arresting officer to ascertain whether the defendant, who was
obviously showing signs of alcohol intoxication, had been driving his mother’s
car.
i find that p.c. said had the following pieces
of information, which gave him the necessary grounds to arrest the defendant for
impaired driving and to make a valid breath sample demand:
i.
the hood of the car which was reported to have
been driving poorly and hitting curbs was warm to p.c. said’s touch, which to
him signified recent use, when he arrived at the registered owner’s address, some
14 minutes after first receiving the report of a possibly impaired driver;
ii.
the defendant admitted having driven the
vehicle;
iii.
the defendant admitted having consumed alcohol;
iv.
the defendant had an odour of alcohol on his
breath;
v.
the defendant appeared to be unsteady on his
feet;
vi.
the defendant appeared to require the front door
jamb and the porch pillar to maintain his balance while walking; and
vii.
the defendant slurred his words while speaking.
i accept that p.c. said held a subjective
opinion that the defendant was impaired by alcohol while driving his mother’s
vehicle. i find that it was objectively reasonable to come to this conclusion
based on all of the circumstances known and considered by p.c. said at the time
he formed his opinion. until he confirmed who had driven the vehicle, i agree
with the defendant’s submission that it would not have been appropriate to
arrest anyone, let alone the defendant, for the alleged offence.
given this finding, i do not accept that it has
been proven to any degree that the defendant’s arrest was improper or arbitrary
in any way.
i find that there were ample grounds to arrest
the defendant and make a valid breath sample demand pursuant to
s.
320.28(1)
(a)(i) of the
criminal code
. this finding is dispositive of the
defendant’s s. 8
charter
application.
the
defendant’s utterances were not voluntary
i accept the testimony of p.c.’s carroll and
said that there were no threats, promises, or inducements made to interfere
with the defendant’s free will and choice to admit to the qualified technician
that he was the “selfish” driver who was “hitting curbs” due to his excessive
alcohol consumption that night.
i am not troubled that the prosecution did not
call as witnesses the cells officer or the staff sergeant who had assisted with
booking the defendant. from all of the evidence, it is apparent that the police
were respectful and at times even friendly with the defendant. there was no
suggestion of an atmosphere of oppression or manipulation caused by the police to
get the defendant to make the damning admissions he did.
however, i have concerns respecting what the
qualified technician told the defendant about the significance of the statutory
breath demand:
d.c. babore.
okay. so i just wanna make it clear what i read right there, that’s a lawful
demand.
so, like in the eyes of the court, what it means is that if that if
you fail or refuse to take part in any part of this evaluation, you could be charged
with an additional charge or refusal
. so it’s additional criminal charge to
refuse or fail this. do you understand that? [emphasis added]
i accept that d.c. babore did not think that the
defendant was confused by this. nonetheless, i am left with a reasonable doubt
that this explanation may have caused the defendant to believe that he was
required by law to participate in
all aspects
of the breath sample
procedure, including the questions asked by the qualified technician.
in my view, this doubt is raised because of the
wording of the explanation, “any part of this evaluation,” and its timing. it follows
the lawful demand and it precedes the words, “so, it’s an additional criminal
charge
to refuse
or fail this.”
as well, this explanation purports to interpret
how the courts view
any refusal
or failure. lastly, this caution came
from the person who administered the breath sampling procedure, a “detective
constable” no less, who was identified as a “qualified technician.”
i would also note that d.c. babore began to ask
about the defendant’s driving and his awareness of his impairment during the
pause between the first and second breath sampling. the defendant may well have
concluded that the questioning comprised a “part” of the “
evaluation”
that he was told was required by law. moreover, the officer never confirmed
that the defendant knew that he could refuse to answer any questioning.
as such, i have a reasonable doubt that the
defendant’s admissions to the qualified technician were truly voluntary and the
product of the defendant’s free-will. i cannot admit the defendant’s utterances
on the trial proper.
the result on
the trial proper
although none of the evidence was excluded for
any
charter
violations, the only evidence of identity (that it was the
defendant who drove the hyundai in the manner reported) came from the
defendant. without his utterances to the qualified technician, there is no
admissible evidence to prove who had driven while possibly impaired by alcohol.
likewise, there is no admissible evidence that the defendant had an
impermissible blood alcohol concentration within two hours of driving.
conclusion
the prosecution has failed to prove either count
alleged against mr. maiato. accordingly, keith maiato is acquitted of both
charges.
released:  08 march 2025
justice
g. paul renwick
r
. v.
collins
,
1987 canlii 84 (scc)
, s.c.j. no. 15 at para.
21
.
collins
, supra
, at para.
23
.
canada (combines investigation acts, director of
investigation and research)
v.
southam
inc.
,
1984 canlii 33 (scc)
,
s.c.j. no. 36
.
r.
v
. storrey
,
1990 canlii 125 (scc)
, s.c.j. no. 12 at para.
17
.
r.
v
. notaro
,
o.j. no. 2537 (c.a.) at paras.
34-35
.
1997 canlii 6316 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3097, at para.
18
.
r.
v
. kumarasamy
,
2011 onsc 1385
at para.
42
.
r.
v
. roberts
,
2018 onca 411 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 2279 (c.a.) at para.
63
.
r
.
v suberu,
2009 scc 33 (canlii)
, scj no 33 at paras.
21-22
.
suberu
, supra
, at para.
23
.