citation:
r. v. mcduffie
, 2025 oncj 421
date:
2025 08 12
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
jason mcduffie
before justice fergus odonnell
reasons for sentence delivered orally on
21 may, 2025
mr. d. anger
.........................................................................................................
for the
crown
mr. m. del gobbo.......................................................... for
the defendant, jason mcduffie
fergus
odonnell j.
overview
jason mcduffie is a long-haul truck
driver.  some of mr. mcduffie’s work involves moving cattle.  some of his
work involves crossing the canada-united states border.  he has driven for
a living for three decades.  he has supported his family over those three
decades by driving a truck.  supporting his family--financially and in
other ways--is his life focus.  he has special-needs grandchildren he
helps out with; he has aging parents he helps care for despite his heavy
work schedule. his family speak well of him.  he has never been in trouble
with the law.
it beggars belief, therefore, that
mr. mcduffie’s life intersects with my life as a criminal court judge.
how did we get here?
we got here because mr. mcduffie
decided to play russian roulette with the border.  every act of smuggling
is a bit like russian roulette, although the odds of losing may not be the
same in each activity and the consequences of losing are definitely not
the same.  the public interest requires, however, that the consequences of
losing at smuggling should not be trivial either.  the reality is that the
effective functioning of borders between friendly, democratic countries
depends massively on the honesty of importers and travellers, with the
risk of significant criminal, immigration and/or financial consequences
serving as the incentive to remain honest or, looked at from the other
perspective, as the deterrent to cheats who seek to gain financially by
evading duties and taxes that apply to everyone for the benefit of
everyone.  given the level of economic and trade interconnectedness across
the globe, and nowhere more so than across the “49
th
parallel”,
customs authorities cannot realistically or thoroughly inspect anything
more than the tiniest sliver of a percentage of goods, vessels and
vehicles crossing the border.  sophisticated smugglers depend on this low
risk of detection to smuggle items across borders.  however, the
controlling minds of smuggling schemes do recognize that there is a risk
of there being a live round in the cylinder, as it were, on every illicit
border crossing, namely the risk of the person doing the actual
importation being caught red-handed.  the smartest criminals, therefore,
keep themselves out of harm’s way by recruiting others to do the riskiest
part for the lowest advantage.  mr. mcduffie willingly signed up for that
job and that risk, to the significant detriment of his fellow citizens.
and so we are here, with the crown
arguing that mr. mcduffie, who was foolish enough to take relatively low
pay for carrying out the riskiest part of the crime, should forfeit his
freedom.  his crimes carry a maximum sentence of five years in the
penitentiary.
the charges
mr. mcduffie pleaded guilty to the
following four charges:
smuggling or attempting
to smuggle on 31 march, 2021, contrary to s. 159 of the
customs act
.
being in possession of unstamped
tobacco on 31 march, 2021, contrary to s. 32 of the
excise act.
smuggling or attempting to smuggle
on 18 august, 2022, contrary to s. 159 of the
customs act
.
being in possession of unstamped
tobacco on 18 august, 2022, contrary to s. 32 of the
excise act.
although the journey was rather long,
mr. mcduffie intended to plead from very early on in the proceedings.
the crown proceeded by indictment.
the
customs act
offences are punishable by a fine of up to
five-hundred-thousand dollars and/or up to five years’ imprisonment.  the
excise
act
offences are punishable by a minimum fine based on weight that
would amount to approximately ten million dollars, based on the three
seized shipments in this case and/or by up to five years’ imprisonment.
the details of the offences
the details of the offences are set
out in the cbsa case history, which became an agreed statement of facts
filed on the guilty pleas.  that statement shows as follows.
on 31 march, 2021, mr. mcduffie entered
canada at queenston with a tractor-trailer supposedly loaded with waste
plastic valued at nine-hundred u.s. dollars.  the primary officer noticed
that the actual weight of the truck was about ten-thousand-pounds out of
sync with the accompanying documentation.  secondary inspection showed
that the trailer was in fact loaded to the gunwales with
one-hundred-and-thirty-two crates of unstamped tobacco, approximately
fifteen-thousand kilograms.
cbsa investigators examined their
records for border crossings by mr. mcduffie and also his twin brother, james
(hereafter “james” to distinguish him from the defendant before me, jason).
these records showed three other similar importations that had not been
intercepted, supposedly also scrap plastic.  in a sign of sloppiness, the
paperwork for multiple shipments listed the weight of those shipments to
be exactly the same, down to the second decimal point, or within ten
grams of each other across a supposed real weight of thirteen-thousand
kilograms.  mr. mcduffie had imported two of the previous shipments and james
had imported the other.
mr. mcduffie told cbsa officers
that he had been contracted to pick up waste plastic in the united states
and had not even gotten out of his cab while the shipment was loaded and
sealed.
cbsa then put mr. mcduffie’s
company on a lookout, which yielded results on 18 august, 2022, when mcduffie
transport filed paperwork for two incoming truckloads, supposedly of
steering wheel locks and of aluminum cans.  each truck, one driven by mr.
mcduffie and the other by his brother james, was referred to secondary
and found to contain boxes of tobacco that were effectively twins of each
other and of the shipment seized from mr. mcduffie in march, 2021.
when interviewed on 18 august,
2022, mr. mcduffie spun out a cock-and-bull story to investigators for
about thirty-four minutes.  eventually cbsa officers confronted mr.
mcduffie with two identical bills of lading from a tobacco company in virginia,
dated two days earlier, each of which had been seized that day from his
own tractor.  at this point, mr. mcduffie finally stopped with the nonsense.
mr. mcduffie disclosed that
someone named “rav” had hired him in march, 2021 to bring a shipment from
the united states.  on the way back to canada, mr. mcduffie noticed the
smell of tobacco from the trailer, broke the seal and discovered a load
of tobacco.  he called “rav” and told him, whereupon “rav” offered him
one thousand dollars on top of the cartage fee to continue with the
shipment.  mr. mcduffie did so and delivered the load near aberfoyle.  later
that month, when mr. mcduffie was first caught by cbsa, “rav” did not pay
him.  more recently, “harb” paid him cad $2,500.00 on top of the normal
shipping charges for each shipment of tobacco he smuggled into canada and
mr. mcduffie said that he and james had brought in about twelve loads
that had not been detected by cbsa.  this included all four shipments
that were supposedly scrap plastic.
further investigation of border
crossings involving the two brothers revealed shipments of “paper” that
the manufacturer of the paper said were not genuine.
each intercepted shipment weighed
approximately fifteen-thousand-kilograms.
mr. mcduffie’s background
mr. mcduffie’s pre-sentence report
shows that he is fifty-three years old.  he was raised by his mother and
his step-father, who has been in his life since he was six years old.  his
childhood was good and leaves him with many positive memories.  he has a
close relationship with his twin brother, who is his co-accused, and has
two slightly younger sisters with whom he does not have a close
relationship.  his relationship with his parents is close and he regrets
that his work schedule keeps him from seeing them as often as he would
like, although he always makes himself available to help them as needed.
mr. mcduffie has been happily
married for over thirty years, with very little discord in the
relationship.  he and his wife have four children, three of whom are
adults and now live outside the family home, with the youngest, a
seventeen-year-old, still at home.  one of his daughters has two children
who have special needs and he and his wife provide care for those children
and one other grandchild while their daughter is away at school.
mr. mcduffie has worked as a truck
driver since 1993 and is now a self-employed, long-haul contractor.  he
has no substance or alcohol issues.  he is fairly inwardly-focused and values
family time and alone time.  his wife describes him as a hard worker and
his mother and son describe him as devoted, exemplary and generous.  he
says he wishes he had thought more about what he was doing and had made
different decisions.
it bears noting again that mr.
mcduffie has no previous criminal record.
the positions of the parties
mr. anger has provided a clutch of
previous sentencing decisions, which i have reviewed.  there are half a
dozen of them, a mix of trial and summary-conviction-appeal decisions, setting
out sentences imposed for tobacco smuggling offences in the past.  all were
guilty pleas.  as is common, none is a perfect match for mr. mcduffie—some
defendants were indigenous, some had a previous record and some received
conditional sentences, while one got a mid-range reformatory sentence of
real jail.
mr. anger says that given their
scope, the appropriate consequence for mr. mcduffie’s crimes is real
jail.  each offence provides for fines as a penalty, but the mandatory
minimum
fine under the
excise act
would amount to over ten-million dollars
for those two counts.  i do not believe that either crown or defence sees
that as a viable sentencing option.  mr. anger says that a conditional
sentence might be an option, but, correctly in my view, rejects the
conditional sentence as modelled by mr. del gobbo as entirely unfit.  that
proposal would, he says, again rightly in my opinion, have virtually no
real-life impact on mr. mcduffie.  mr. anger submitted that if a
conditional sentence were imposed it should be the maximum possible
sentence of two-years-less-a-day with house arrest and exceptions for the
entire period.
in making these submissions, mr.
anger characteristically led by stressing that mr. mcduffie’s guilty plea
is of significant weight and that his position at the bottom of the ladder
earning a couple of thousand dollars per load is also a factor that weighs
in the calculation.  the other relevant weight, however, is the huge
amount of tobacco involved, even limiting it to the three loads that were
intercepted, never mind perhaps an additional nine or so more that made it
across the border undetected.  mr. anger called for a denunciatory and
deterrent sentence that would recognize the huge amount of revenue lost to
the government as a result of mr. mcduffie’s crimes.
mr. del gobbo likewise points to
mr. mcduffie’s good antecedents and lack of a criminal record.  he points
out that mr. mcduffie is, “as far from mr. big as you could be”, which is
correct, and says that he, “made a couple of thousand dollars”, which
doesn’t reflect that he made about that much (twenty-five hundred dollars)
per load
according to his own statement.  by his own admission,
with about twelve loads imported, his and james’s takings would have come
in around thirty-thousand dollars.  in response to mr. anger’s assertion
that a conditional sentence on the terms proposed by mr. del gobbo would
have no impact, mr. del gobbo said that the
whole
point of a
conditional sentence is for a viable candidate to be able to continue to
work.  he asked that the conditional sentence be split in thirds (house
arrest/curfew/no location restrictions) and that mr. mcduffie be allowed
to travel to the united states to continue long-haul trucking there.
mr. mcduffie himself said his work
and away pattern currently is about twenty-six days away from home in each
month and four or five days at home.  he said he could arrange to work
long-haul within canada on an eight-day-away/seven-days-at-home schedule.
some
basic principles of sentence
i do not propose to list,
chapter-and-verse,
all
of the relevant principles of sentence in
these reasons.  however, it is important to stress that the purpose of the
criminal law is to protect canadians and to create respect for the law by
using appropriate penalties to denounce crime and the harm done by it, to
deter mr. mcduffie and others from breaking the law, to create a sense of
responsibility on their part, to maximize the offender’s prospects for
rehabilitation and to provide reparations for the harm done.  offenders
are to be separated from society, or, in plain english, imprisoned, only
where necessary and, even then, only to the extent necessary.
the tools available to a sentencing
judge include fines, probation orders and sentences of imprisonment.
where a jail sentence of under two years is appropriate, it may be
feasible to permit that sentence to be served in the community, that is,
as a conditional sentence of imprisonment whereby the offender continues
to live in his own home subject to various forms of restraint on what he
can do and when he can do it.  a conditional sentence is not available,
however, unless the court is satisfied that it would not endanger the
community (that is, what is the risk of the offender re-offending and the
nature of the harm that would be done by him?) and unless the court is
satisfied that the sentence would serve the goals of sentencing (including
denunciation, deterrence, etc.).  as a matter of law, a conditional
sentence is a theoretically available option here.  as a matter of law, depending
on the case, a conditional sentence can serve many of the objectives of
sentence, including the harsher objectives such as deterrence and
denunciation.  real jail will tend to be better at achieving those
objectives but will often come at a real cost to the goal of
rehabilitation.
the cardinal principle of any
sentence is that it must be proportional.  proportionality means that a
sentence balances the objective seriousness of an offender’s conduct with
the offender’s degree of moral responsibility.  factors including, but not
limited to, youth, substance-dependence, mental health challenges, etc.,
etc. might affect a person’s degree of moral responsibility, as would the
nature of a person’s role in an offence.
every sentence has to be tailored
to fit the specific facts of the offences and the offender.  real jail has
to be used with restraint.
the appropriate sentence
with respect to the seriousness of mr.
mcduffie’s offences, the first point is to make it clear that while the
charges were laid under the
customs act
and the
excise act
,
these are not trivial regulatory offences.  these offences were part of a
pattern of large-scale and repeated tax-evasion.  ultimately, smuggling
like this is nothing other than a location-specific form of fraud, which
oxford languages defines as:  “
wrongful
or criminal deception intended to result in financial
or personal gain.”  mr. mcduffie brought trailer-load after trailer-load
of contraband into canada by lying and deceiving customs authorities about
what he was carrying.  the duties and taxes payable on just the three shipments
seized (one on 31 march, 2021 and two on 18 august, 2023) amounts to a
staggering $17,516,058.59.
in doing so, mr.
mcduffie sold out his fellow citizens, his neighbours, his friends.  the
functions of government are many but include protecting canadians from our
enemies (or sometimes from our allies); and providing health-care and
education, potable water and breathable air, roads to drive on and
cultural enrichment to thrive on, as well as economic opportunities and
stability to maximize canadians’ quality of life.  all of these things
cost money.  that money comes from various sources including taxes and
duties.  some taxes are not only revenue-generating, but are also
intentionally repressive, such as levies on tobacco products, which have
historically been a major driver of avoidable early death.  in avoiding
taxes as mr. mcduffie did, he both stole from his fellow citizens, whose
aging parents might have benefited from a few more hours of psw support,
for example, and undermined long-standing public efforts to eradicate smoking,
since one can reasonably expect that anyone receiving the tobacco
delivered by mr. mcduffie wasn’t likely to be too concerned about whether
it was sold on to minors or any other violations of the
smoke-free
ontario act
.
to put the dollar values mentioned
above in terms that the average ontarian could understand when upset about
his or her twelve-hour wait at the emergency room or the teacher-student
ratio in their child’s school, the taxes and duties that would have been
evaded on just the three seized shipments would hire
one-hundred-and-seventy-five nurses or one-hundred-and-seventy-five
teachers for a year.
if one notes the time-range of the offences, it is particularly galling
that all of this evasion and smuggling was happening while the federal and
provincial governments were haemorrhaging cash to protect canadians from
the covid-19 virus.
the issue of mr. mcduffie’s
specific role is one that crosses between the seriousness of the offence
and his degree of moral responsibility.  i accept entirely mr. del gobbo’s
assertion that mr. mcduffie is “about as far from mr. big as you could be”.
i suspect that when mr. mcduffie was charged, and one hopes thereafter
ceased smuggling, “mr. big” replaced him within a short time with some
other person who was willing to compromise himself for a couple of
thousand dollars a trip while taking on all of the front-end risk of
arrest and prosecution.
the reality is that he and his twin brother would be dispensable to the
rav-s and harb-s who paid them, but that should have been obvious to mr.
mcduffie and his brother all along. in that sense, they are no different
than the drug courier, who insulates drug importers by taking most or all
of the real risk of apprehension at the border.  however, even if mr.
mcduffie was a wee cog and rav and harb were medium or big cogs, the
reality is that machines with cogs do not work unless all the cogs are in
place, however big or small they may think they are.  also, even if mr.
mcduffie was “just” a small cog on the financial balance sheet of the
smuggling operation, he was also a very large cog in terms of what needed
to be done for the organization to evade about five million dollars in
duties and taxes on every load.  without the drivers, none of this could
happen.
in relation to mr. mcduffie’s
degree of personal responsibility, other points are noteworthy.  first,
there are the other, unpleaded smuggling events that were read in as part
of the plea.  second, he recruited his brother, who helped in the scheme.
third, even after being caught with the shipment in march, 2021, mr.
mcduffie, rather than being scared straight, continued on to sell himself
to rav and harb or whoever again and again and again.  fourth, mr.
mcduffie committed his crimes as part of a conspiracy, with rav and harb
and his brother and probably various other people whose existence is
unknown to him.  it has long been clear that conspiracies or other
offences of joint criminal intent are seen as more dangerous to society
than individual offenders because the joint effort increases the
likelihood that the criminal scheme will succeed.
there are many positive things to
be said about mr. mcduffie.  they include the fact that he has pleaded
guilty. it is very important that people who plead guilty be treated more
leniently than identical offenders who choose to go to trial.  he has
intended to plead guilty all along.  he has no criminal record.  i accept
his remorse as entirely genuine, although it would be a better reflection
on him if it had manifested itself as soon as he was caught with the 31
march, 2021 shipment.  he is obviously not a youthful first offender, but
he has spent the three decades since the time he would have fit in that
category staying out of trouble and working long and hard to support his
family, the latter decade of that career in long-haul trucking, a job that
involves significant periods of separation from them.  the material before
me portrays a man who values his family and is valued by them and who,
leaving aside the “small” matter of repeatedly smuggling huge amounts of
tobacco, is someone anyone would value as a spouse, parent or child.
mr. mcduffie is thus the bane of
every criminal judge’s existence:  the basically good person who has
committed a very serious offence.  the more common example of this would
be a person with a background like mr. mcduffie’s who has lived a
prosocial life for decades and then killed someone in an impaired driving
or dangerous driving offence.  mr. mcduffie has obviously not killed
anyone, although his tobacco would probably do that over time, but unlike
the driving offenders i refer to his offences were calculated and not
situational, repeated rather than single.
i suspect that, while he advocated
for a period of real jail, mr. anger would be reasonably content if i were
to impose a maximum-length conditional sentence with real teeth.  it is
obviously not my job to make mr. anger happy, but it is my job to assess
all of the available sentencing options and to impose the most restrained
punishment that will satisfy the objectives of sentencing.  as i said earlier,
a conditional sentence is a theoretically available option.
i should also note that there is no
such thing as a single correct sentence for a particular offender and a
particular offence.  there is always a range of sentencing options that
different judges, acting reasonably, might consider fit.  i do not believe
i could dispute that, for mr. mcduffie and his offences, even as a first
offender on a plea, a sentence of real jail in the upper reformatory to
lower penitentiary range could be justified, because of the seriousness of
the offences and the ensuing harm to society, which is not theoretical.  for
someone generally parallel to mr. mcduffie and with a similar background,
but who went to trial and thus showed no remorse, i would think that the
absence of such remorse on these facts would
dictate
a sentence of
real jail
in the upper reformatory to low penitentiary range.
for someone
in a higher position in the operation, perhaps a rav or a harb, assuming
they are mid-level rather than top-level participants, i would think that
on a guilty plea a sentence from the top of the reformatory range to
perhaps three years would be appropriate and a conditional sentence at the
bottom end of that range would seem highly improbable.  sentences for the
people profiting substantially from the scheme should be higher still.
i take from mr. del gobbo’s
submissions that he does not quibble with a maximum conditional sentence
of two-years-less a day as being an appropriate sentence for mr. mcduffie.
however, i fear that his conception of the framework of that conditional
sentence and my conception of an appropriate framework diverge
substantially.
first, while mr. del gobbo had
obtained confirmation from recovery science corporation that mr.
mcduffie’s residence was compatible with gps electronic monitoring, he
suggested that it was not mandatory.  he is correct that it is not
mandatory but conceded that it is applied in the vast majority of cases,
at least where the conditional sentence is anything other than very brief.
given that the conditional sentence is a form of incarceration, one
struggles to think of reasons why electronic monitoring ought not to be
almost automatic.  i have yet to hear any intelligent argument to the
contrary in this or other cases.
second, mr. del gobbo proposed a
conditional sentence of eight months with house arrest and exceptions,
eight months with a curfew and exceptions and eight months (less a day
presumably) with neither house arrest nor curfew.  however appropriate
such a structure might be in another case, i would think that its use in
the present case would tend to diminish the objective gravity of mr.
mcduffie’s crimes dramatically and would contribute, in the eyes of a
reasonable member of the public, to a decline in confidence in the courts.
third, mr. del gobbo envisaged a
conditional sentence whereby mr. mcduffie could continue in his long-haul
driving career.  whether one adopts the original plan (which mr. mcduffie
said would involve him being away from home twenty-six out of thirty or
thirty-one days, or approximately eighty-four percent of the time) or mr.
mcduffie’s alternate suggestion (of eight-days away/seven-days home, or
approximately fifty-three percent of the time), either model involves him
being away from his home, also known as his prison, for a very large part
of the sentence.  there would be effectively no meaningful supervision of
mr. mcduffie for either half of his sentence or as much as four-fifths of
his sentence as his home and his workplace and prison while away on a
long-haul run would be his truck.  i accept mr. del gobbo’s comment that
conditional sentences are intended to, among other things, allow people to
keep working, which allows them to maintain stability, continue being
pro-social, support their family, etc., but conditional sentences do not
necessarily allow people to get on with their lives as usual. all
mechanisms have a breaking point, and i am confident that the structure
proposed by mr. del gobbo goes well beyond what a reasonable observer
would consider to be the breaking point of a conditional sentence.
i also note the defence suggestion
that mr. mcduffie be permitted to continue to drive cargo across the
border during the course of his proposed conditional “incarceration”. there
is a number of problems with this proposal.  the first is that i was
provided no basis at all upon which to conclude that mr. mcduffie would be
allowed into the united states after his sentencing.  the roles of border
officers vary from country to country: in autocratic and
autocratic-adjacent countries they often serve a role controlling thought
and dissent as well as goods.  but the one universal idea that is innate
in customs officers is that they disapprove of smuggling.  the suppression
of smuggling is quite simply their root function, whatever other
regulatory and additional roles might have been added over the years.  the
suppression of smuggling is embedded in customs officers’ history and
encoded in their dna. mr. mcduffie has pleaded guilty to the crime of
smuggling on multiple occasions.  once the united states authorities are
aware of these convictions and sentences, i would be most surprised if he
remained admissible to the united states.  our indictable offences are the
rough equivalent of american felonies, smuggling is a form of fraud and
fraud is an “offence of moral turpitude”, which is a key driver of
inadmissibility to the united states.  while canadian courts are not
experts in united states immigration law, the simple reality of presiding
in a busy border region suggests to me that the likelihood of mr. mcduffie
remaining admissible to the united states without obtaining a waiver is
dim.  i do not have to determine the issue of admissibility because,
unlike other less serious cases, i have been presented with zero basis
upon which to conclude that he is likely to remain admissible to the
united states.
in the absence of any such legal opinion, the idea that he has a future as
a cross-border trucker into the united states lacks an air of reality.
however, even if mr. mcduffie remains
admissible to the united states after he has been sentenced, i would still
not allow him to continue to cross the border as a commercial truck driver
(if at all) while serving a conditional sentence.  to allow him to
continue as if nothing had happened would be to allow him to return at
will to the scene of his crimes, armed with his weapon of choice, his
truck.  i cannot imagine that the courts would retain the confidence of an
informed and reasonable public if i allowed that to happen.
i also note that mr. mcduffie has
only spent part of his life as a long-haul or cross-border driver.
indeed, his long-haul life seems to amount to about a third of his career.
there is nothing before me to suggest he cannot obtain short-haul work,
even if that might be somewhat more inconvenient for him or somewhat less
remunerative than long-haul work.  short-haul work, however, will be much
less inconvenient for him and much more remunerative than would a
significant sentence of real custody, which would not be outside the range
of reasonable sentencing options here.
i reject the idea that i should
allow mr. mcduffie to continue to drive long-haul within canada.  whether
on the schedule he has had to date, where he is away from home almost all
the time or on the half-on/half-off schedule that he suggested when he
addressed the court, it is quite simply too much of a dilution of the
notion of a conditional sentence to serve the essential roles of
deterrence and denunciation and would, like the border crossing, bring the
court’s behaviour into disrepute in the eyes of a reasonable-minded
public.  at a certain point, these proposed exceptions to house arrest
would reduce such a conditional sentence to a mere skeleton of a sentence
and an abuse of the concept.  ultimately, a conditional sentence cannot be
imposed if it would not achieve the objectives of sentencing and the
format proposed by mr. del gobbo would fall hugely short of achieving
those objectives, which include denunciation, deterrence, protection of
the public and generating respect for the law.
what is the appropriate sentence?
having addressed the submissions
made and identified some of the shortcomings therein, the question
remains:  “what is the appropriate sentence for mr. mcduffie?”  the
problem is that, as a person, mr. mcduffie has lived his life,
for the
most part
, as the ideal candidate for a conditional sentence—a mature,
pro-social, hard working person.  however, the damage done by his offences
could easily justify a sentence of real jail.
the conflict can be resolved in
this way:  sometimes, even when the offences are dire, a less harsh
form
of sentence than real jail may suffice so long as the attendant conditions
are sufficiently demanding that they achieve all of the requirements of
sentence, which is a prerequisite for a conditional sentence as set out in
s. 742.1
(a) of the
criminal code
.
although it is an extremely close
call, i have concluded that a conditional sentence can be crafted that recognizes
the seriousness of mr. mcduffie’s crimes and the positive attributes in
his background, although it will bear almost no similarity to the model
proposed by mr. del gobbo.
on each count mr. mcduffie will be
sentenced to a conditional sentence of imprisonment for two years less a
day, followed by one year’s probation.  the sentences will be concurrent
on each count.
the conditions of the conditional
sentence are as follows:
report to a supervisor not later
than 4 p.m. on monday, 26 may, 2025 and thereafter as required.
cooperate with your supervisor and
sign releases and provide proof of compliance.
live at [address
removed], ontario or a place approved by the supervisor and not change
that address without the supervisor’s prior consent.
you will be under home confinement
for the entirety of the sentence and under electronic monitoring.
you are to remain in your residence
or within 100m of the residence at that address at all times, except.
i.
a five-hour period once per
week to obtain the necessities of life, at a time approved by your supervisor.
ii.
for any medical emergencies
involving you or any member of your immediate family or your spouse’s immediate
family.  this includes grandchildren.  this does not include routine care.
iii.
for going directly to and
from and while at employment approved of by your supervisor on a schedule
approved by the supervisor.  unless specifically approved by your supervisor or
otherwise permitted by this order, you shall not be away from home overnight
for more than four nights in any thirty-day period and are otherwise required
to remain in your home overnight.
iv.
up to and including 31
august, 2025, in order to allow a period of transition in the nature of your
employment if that is required, you may be away from home overnight for up to
eight nights in a thirty-day period for the purpose of approved employment, but
shall otherwise be required to remain in your home overnight.  you shall obtain
prior approval from your supervisor for any overnight absence.
v.
for going directly to and
from any legal medical or dental appointments approved by your supervisor.
vi.
for going directly to and
from any assessment and counselling sessions required by your supervisor.
vii.
for going directly to, from
and while performing community service hours.
viii.
for carrying out any legal
obligations regarding compliance with this conditional sentence order.
ix.
you will confirm your
schedule in advance with the supervisor setting out the times for any absences
from your home.
during your home confinement:
i.
you cannot change your
residence without the prior approval of the supervisor.
ii.
you must present yourself at
your doorway on the request of your supervisor or a peace officer for the
purpose of verifying your compliance with your home confinement.
you shall sign all required
undertakings and agreements in relation to the recovery science
electronic monitoring programme and abide by all of the requirements of
that programme.
you shall attend for any
assessment and counselling directed by your supervisor as set out in your
pre-sentence report.
you shall perform 200 hours of
community service at a placement approved of by your supervisor on a
schedule and rate approved of by your supervisor.  these 200 hours must
be completed within the first eighteen months of the sentence.
you are to make reasonable efforts
to seek and maintain suitable employment and provide proof as required.
you shall not leave canada at any
time during the conditional sentence without the prior approval of the
court and shall not, personally or through any partnership or any corporation
that you own, control or have any direct or indirect financial interest
in, have any involvement, directly or indirectly with the cross-border
movement of goods.  you shall not have any contact or communication
directly or indirectly with your brother james at any time within thirty
days of any completed or anticipated entry into or return from the united
states by him.
you shall, not later than 20 june,
2025, advise your supervisor if your illicit income from smuggling was
declared to the canada revenue agency and provide proof of any such
declaration.  if that income was not declared, you shall, not later than 29
august, 2025 file revised income tax declarations with the canada revenue
agency declaring all income derived by you from smuggling for the period
from 1 march, 2021 to 30 august, 2022.  you shall provide proof of those revised
declarations to your supervisor not later than 26 september, 2025 and
shall provide your supervisor with all correspondence between you and the
canada revenue agency, including any notices of reassessment, payments,
payment agreements, etc. until such time as any re-assessments have been
paid in full.
after the completion of the
conditional sentence you will be on probation for a period of one year, on
the following conditions:
report to your probation officer
within fourteen days of the start of the probation order.
i.
your obligation to report
ends when you have completed all of the community service required by this
order and any issues regarding your undeclared income with the canada revenue
agency have been resolved to the satisfaction of your conditional sentence
supervisor or probation officer as the case may by.
you are to perform one hundred
hours of community service at a placement approved of by your supervisor
within the twelve months.
if your declarations of smuggling
income, reassessments and payment of outstanding income taxes arising
therefrom were not completed during the period of your conditional
sentence, you shall complete that process as set out in that order before
the end of the probation period.
you are to sign any releases
required by probation and provide any proof required by them to verify
your compliance with this order.
in closing, i stress that if any of
the elements of this sentence were absent, i would no longer consider it a
fit sentence.  there are cases where a defendant, even a pro-social first
offender, rides the razor’s edge between serving a substantial reformatory
sentence and escaping that outcome by the skin of his teeth.  in those
circumstances, tinkering with any of the elements of a conditional
sentence-the imposition of which enables the offender to escape real jail-
deprives the conditional sentence of its legitimacy.  this concern on my
part might seem misplaced because it has so often been said that the court
of appeal does not “tinker” with sentences (this, however, is only ever
said in a non-ironic way by judges of the court of appeal).  anyone who
has spent enough time arguing cases in the court of appeal will instead know
two things:  first, that this is a common assertion on the part of
appellate judges hearing sentence appeals and, second, that it is
universally true--except when it is not.
this is
not the sort of thing a trial judge should have to mention, never mind
stress, but experience proves the truth of the aphorism, “once bitten,
twice shy”.   to put it in plain english, in cases where an offender hovers
on the boundary between real jail and a conditional sentence, “burdensome”
sentence features (such as community service or monitoring, to name but two
) provide the
added heft that, were they absent, would require a sentence of real jail. removing
such elements would deprive a non-custodial outcome of its legitimacy.  i
would go so far as to borrow a term from a different context and suggest
that diluting the sentence by removing elements like community service and
monitoring would render the sentence “unhinged”.
released:
12 august, 2025
mr.
mcduffie’s case (and his brother james’s) were pre-tried before me on various
occasions, with mr. anger and mr. del gobbo’s predecessor as defence counsel,
although mr. del gobbo approached the plea with knowledge of the previous
pre-trial discussions.  while various positions and options were discussed in
relation to the appropriate sentence, as is my custom at pre-trials, i made no
commitments to either side.
for
the purposes of this illustration the percentage of the amounts payable that
would have flowed to the federal government via duties and excise taxes or to
ontario in relation to provincial tobacco taxation or from ottawa to queen’s
park by way of transfer payments does not matter.
i
accept that $2,500 net (i assume mr. mcduffie did not declare his smuggling
income on his tax return) is not a trivial payment for the average person in
absolute terms, but it is nothing to those who recruited mr. mcduffie and get
to sit back as he takes the fall when he gets caught.  mr. mcduffie made the
choice, repeatedly, to put himself in the line of fire.
it
should go without saying that a person exercising his or her right to a trial
does not by any means disentitle them to consideration for a conditional
sentence, but without that very significant element of genuine remorse and
saving of judicial resources i would have trouble seeing that a conditional
sentence was consistent with the principles and purposes of sentence.  i say
that as a person who has progressed from being a conditional sentence cynic at
the time of their introduction to being a person who adopts them as a
sentencing tool frequently.
by
“upper reformatory to low penitentiary range” i mean here something between
eighteen and thirty months.
the
stated fact that he has continued to cross the border
before
sentencing
is entirely irrelevant. i have no information at all on what information
customs and border protection holds or accesses in relation to canadian
criminal cases that have not yet concluded.
the
appropriateness of a conditional sentence under
s. 742.1
of the
criminal
code
will often depend very heavily on how stringent its conditions are.
see
, for example:
r. v.
ferguson
,
2023 onca 870 (canlii)
.
also
known as “reparations for harm done…to the community” in the language of
s. 718
(e) of the
criminal code
, one of the purposes of a criminal sentence
.