ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. liu
, 2025 oncj 168
date:
2025 03 28
court
file no.:  toronto 4811-998- 22-10007426-00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
yinuo liu
before
justice christine mainville
heard
on august 8, september 11, 12, 13, december 12, 2024 and january 24, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 28, 2025
marnie goldenberg............................................................................ counsel
for the crown
brian greenspan and anna zhang............................................ counsel
for the accused
mainville j.:
the accused mr. liu and the complainant ms. yu were international
students at the university of toronto, and in a dating relationship. ms. yu
testified that in november of 2022, she learned that mr. liu was cheating on her.
on december 4, 2022, after she confronted him with this information, she says
he threatened to kill himself with a knife and what appeared to be a real firearm.
she had seen this weapon before at his home.
the police seized and analyzed this weapon, which turned out to be an
airsoft bb handgun. they also seized an airsoft bb rifle from the accused’s
residence, along with police paraphernalia.
ms. yu testified that mr. liu had sent her and posted on social media a
photo of himself in a police uniform. she had also seen him wear this uniform
inside his apartment. she testified that he represented himself as a police
officer, that she believed he was a supervisor with the toronto police service
(tps), and that that is why she believed he had real firearms.
after ms. yu reported the matter to the police and a search warrant was
executed at mr. liu’s residence, he was charged with assault, forcible
confinement and criminal harassment by threatening conduct in respect of the
december 4
th
incident. he was also charged with possession of three
weapons for a purpose dangerous to the public peace, and wearing a police
uniform in a manner to have people believe he was a peace officer.
ms. yu was the central witness for the prosecution. the parties agreed
on certain facts set out in an agreed statement of facts, and i heard from
police officers involved in the search of mr. liu’s residence and analysis of
the weapons seized.  mr. liu did not call a defence.
the issue for me to decide is whether the crown has proven the charges
beyond a reasonable doubt. in this case, this primarily turns on ms. yu’s
credibility and reliability.
the principles to be applied
mr. liu is presumed innocent. there is no obligation on him to do
anything to establish his innocence. the presumption of innocence remains in
place, unless and until the crown has proven each essential element of the
offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
reasonable doubt is based on reason and common sense. it is
logically connected to the evidence or lack of evidence. it is not enough for
me to believe that mr. liu is probably or likely guilty. reasonable doubt
requires more than mere probability. although it cannot be described with
mathematical precision, reasonable doubt is a high standard, consistent with
its role as a safeguard against wrongful convictions. at the same time,
reasonable doubt does not require proof beyond all doubt, nor is it proof to an
absolute certainty.
in assessing the evidence of the witnesses in this case, i must
consider their credibility and reliability. credibility relates to the honesty
of the witness, including whether the witness was trying to tell the truth and
if the witness was candid, sincere, biased, evasive or prone to exaggeration or
minimization. reliability relates to the accuracy of a witness’ testimony and
involves a consideration of the person’s ability to accurately observe, recall
and describe the events in issue. any witness whose evidence on an issue is not
credible cannot give reliable evidence on the same point. however, credibility
alone does not establish reliability, as a truthful witness may give unreliable
evidence.
testimony can be assessed through a non-exhaustive list of
factors, including the plausibility of the evidence; the presence of
independent supporting or contradicting evidence; the internal and external
consistency of the evidence; the witness’ apparent willingness to be fair and
forthright without any personal motive or agenda; and to a limited extent, the
witness’ demeanour while testifying.
i will assess the elements of the offences as needed in my below
analysis.
general credibility and reliability assessment
i
found serious issues with ms. yu’s evidence. the animosity and resentment she still
feels towards mr. liu is palpable. it was apparent throughout her testimony
that much of what she had to say was intended for his ears. remarks were made
that were clearly directed at him and intended to send a message to him. they
were not responsive to the questions asked. emotional reactions such as mocking
laughs were signals to him.
i
do not place much weight on ms. yu’s demeanour, which may also have in part
been the product of nerves, but the whole of her testimony made clear the
intent of her complaint to the police and testimony before the court: this was
retribution.
this
sentiment is captured quite plainly in text messages ms. yu sent a friend
shortly before the december 4
th
incident, after ms. yu had been informed
of mr. liu’s cheating. these messages were sent in the context of ms. yu having
informed mr. liu that she was returning to china. she informed the friend that
she had “hoodwinked” her ex-boyfriend, and stated: “when you stage a play, do
the whole thing”. she wrote to the friend that she was “laughing to death”.
when
confronted with these messages in cross-examination, ms. yu questioned whether
she had in fact lied to mr. liu when she told him she was going to china,
testifying that her plans were simply not finalized when she told him, and she
ultimately decided against it. she explained the “hoodwinking” message by stating
that this was a friend she was not particularly close to, so she did not want
to share her plans.
this
answer and her entire testimony about these text messages makes no sense. ms.
yu was evasive in response to this line of questioning and tried to change the
subject. i entirely reject her explanation of this series of messages. they
plainly demonstrate that she was intent on teaching mr. liu a lesson.
after
the december 4
th
incident and just prior to going to the police, ms.
yu learned that mr. liu had in fact cheated on her with not just one, but several
women. she confronted him alongside several other individuals and posted
negative comments on social media about him. she encouraged people to share her
negative posts widely. she sought evidence against him to bring to the police. she
fabricated a fake phone call about someone threatening her in an effort to have
him admit to carrying a knife and gun. she already had text messages admitting
as much, but thought they were not specific enough – she agreed with the
suggestion that she wanted to make sure she nailed him.
ms.
yu in fact admitted in her testimony that she wanted to teach mr. liu a lesson
in how to respect a lady properly. she agreed that she was very angry when she
found out he was cheating on him, as she was deeply in love with him. after mr.
liu was charged, she sent him a message asking if he was remorseful about
cheating on her.
it
is abundantly clear that ms. yu wanted to teach mr. liu a lesson after learning
that he had cheated on her. she still had this agenda at trial, as reflected by
some of her answers that were intended to send him a message, rather than being
provided in an effort to tell the truth plainly and directly, to the best of
her ability.
while
her feelings are understandable, the extent of her animus toward mr. liu –
which clearly continues to this day – causes me to approach her evidence with
great caution. it was apparent to me that several answers she provided were
untruthful or intended to mislead. she at times contradicted herself, providing
answers in response to certain questions that suited her in that moment, despite
those answers being wholly implausible or contradicting things she had
previously stated. in several instances, she failed to directly answer the
questions asked.
i
certainly cannot say that ms. yu testified in a fair and balanced manner. she
was not candid in her responses or trying as best she could to assist the court
in arriving at the truth. she was an untrustworthy witness.
i
therefore have serious concerns about the credibility of her evidence, which
informs my analysis of whether the crown has proven all essential elements of
the offences charged.
events leading up to december 4
th
impersonating a peace officer
mr.
liu is charged under
s. 130(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
that between
august 1
st
and september 30
th
, 2022, not being a police
officer, he wore a uniform in a manner to have people believe he was a peace
officer.
the
crown argues that i may find that mr. liu impersonated a peace officer within
this timeframe based either on his representations to ms. yu or his social
media post that depicted him in what resembles a police uniform.
i
first address the representations that ms. yu claims mr. liu made to her, and
her testimony that she believed him to be a police officer based on his representations
that he was the youngest serving supervisor for the tps.
ms.
yu knew that, like her, mr. liu was a 19-year-old full-time student at the
university of toronto on a student visa. she believed this to be the case not
only based on his representations, but based on the fact that they attended a
class together.
when
questioned about how she could therefore have believed him to also be a tps
supervisor, ms. yu explained that she did not know how the police system works
here in canada. but even if she could have believed, on his word, that he was a
tps supervisor, she testified that she also believed him to be an air canada
pilot because he owned an air canada captain uniform, and she claims he once
asked her to drive him to work. she also indicated that mr. liu purported to be
an american citizen who was going to fight on behalf of the american military,
and that he was also the prince of laos. she giggled as she testified to the
latter.
in
my assessment, her claim that she genuinely believed him to be a police officer
based on representations he made is not believable.
ms.
yu acknowledged that, although she had seen mr. liu in his police outfit, she
never saw him exit his apartment or apartment elevator with it.
she
reported that she did see him wearing it in pictures he posted on social media.
when asked in direct examination whether there was any message about why he was
in that uniform in the associated social media, she answered no.
in
cross-examination, ms. yu acknowledged that the picture of mr. liu in the
police outfit had been posted on his instagram account on october 31
st
,
2022. another was followed by a pumpkin emoji. ms. yu claimed that it wasn’t
until this very moment, in cross-examination, that she realized he was posting
on halloween. she also claimed she had received the picture from mr. liu earlier,
in june, though not through a social media posting.
though
ms. yu may have received the picture of mr. liu in uniform or a similar one
earlier in time, in a one-on-one communication with him, i reject her evidence
that she never previously realized that the social media post of him in uniform
was related to halloween.
yet
ms. yu never disclosed that the police uniform photograph she identified as
having been posted by the accused on his social media was posted on halloween. instead,
she denied in examination-in-chief that there were messages in his social media
explaining why he was in that uniform.
moreover,
the text messaging evidence shows that mr. liu in fact advised ms. yu to call
the police when he believed she was being threatened (based on a ploy she had
concocted). this is incongruent with him being a police officer himself or
representing as much. while he could have deemed it more appropriate for her to
reach out to the police rather than getting involved himself, at no time does
ms. yu make reference to him being a police officer when he tells her to call
the police. nor does he.
similarly,
ms. yu does not make any reference to her purported belief that he is a police
officer when mr. liu sent her a picture of the long gun and tells her it’s an airsoft
gun. nor does he. in fact, he tells her it is an airsoft gun, which is
precisely what it is. ms. yu testified that she believed the firearms mr. liu had
were real because she believed him to be a police officer. she also however
testified that she believed an air gun was a gun that can be used for hunting.
even
if ms. yu did not know what an airsoft gun was, or that that is not typically
the type of weapon carried by the police, mr. liu cannot be taken to have known
that. the point is that he was honest with her about what the gun was, which is
relevant to his intent in showing her the picture. the airsoft gun message
undermines her assertion that he had been representing himself to her as a
police officer.
ms.
yu may well be naïve, but her account that she genuinely thought mr. liu was a
police officer, based on representations he would have made, is completely unbelievable.
granted,
in order to prove the charge, there is no requirement that the complainant (or
any other person) have believed the representation to be true. as stated in
r.
v. palinker
,
o.j. no. 1403, at para. 73
, “the issue is whether the
statement was intended and made”.
but
ms. yu’s lack of candor regarding what she believed based on mr. liu’s
representations bear on what representations were in fact made by mr. liu and
in what manner. given the above concerns and the other credibility issues i
have referenced with respect to ms. yu’s testimony, i am not prepared to rely
on her account that any representations about being a police officer were
seriously made by mr. liu in such a way that he intended them to be taken seriously.
this suggestion is also undermined by the later halloween post and the airsoft
gun message. it is also undermined by the fact that, on her version, he would
also have represented himself to be a number of fantastical things.
nor
can i convict mr. liu based on representations made to others, more
specifically by posting a photo or photos of himself in a police-type uniform, even
though these do not hinge on ms. yu’s testimony. i find that these were posted in
relation to halloween, as was acknowledged by ms. yu.
i
note that the timeframe of the charge does not cover october 31
st
.
but leaving aside this date issue, the picture posted on halloween with a
pumpkin emoji suggests that any representation of him being a police officer
that could be taken from that (as opposed to a representation of him being in a
police costume) was not meant to be taken seriously. in other words, i cannot
find that mr. liu was trying to pass as a police officer by posting that picture
on halloween day. as stated above, this public post also undermines the
suggestion that mr. liu ever intended to falsely represent himself to anyone as
a police officer, or that he did so in anything more than jest.
the
crown argues that the accused’s clothing depicts a uniform, not a costume. but the
fact that the outfit is of good quality and looks realistic does not make a
costume less of a costume, if that is the intent.
while
mr. liu’s outfit does look like a real police uniform, it appears to be
available for public purchase from a storefront location and does not coincide
with tps uniforms. in fact, the police badge seized from mr. liu’s apartment
has an eagle and american flag on it. while the crown does not need to prove
that the uniform belongs to or is an imitation of a particular police service,
nor is there evidence that mr. liu in fact wore that badge when making any
representations of being a tps officer, the disparities further undermine the
claim that he intended to falsely represent himself as a police officer.
there
is also no evidence that mr. liu ever exited his apartment building in uniform.
ms. yu acknowledged that when she saw mr. liu wearing the uniform, he was
inside his apartment. she only saw him head to the elevator with it on one
occasion.
mr.
liu was clearly interested in collecting not only police paraphernalia but
other types of uniforms, such as a pilot uniform. this informs his purpose in
possessing and sporting a police uniform. this case is very much unlike the
factual scenarios in
palinker
or
r. v. vollrath
,
2016 abpc 130
, which
the crown relied on, where the accused were convicted after personating a
police officer for the purpose of perpetrating a sexual assault and an abduction,
respectively.
the
above points undermine the suggestion that the accused wore his outfit in a
manner to have people believe he was a peace officer, or in fact intended ms.
yu or anyone else to actually believe he was a peace officer. the crown has not
proven that the accused intended on making such a representation. nor has it
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that he in fact made any such representation
to ms. yu.
an
acquittal will therefore follow on count one.
possession of a weapon for a dangerous purpose
at
the time of closing submissions, the crown invited a dismissal of count four
relating to mr. liu having possessed a weapon for a dangerous purpose prior to
the incident of december 4
th
.
proof
of the other weapon possession counts is informed by the events of december 4
th
,
to which i will now turn.
events of december 4
th
the
events of that day began with mr. liu’s efforts to meet with ms. yu after she had
learned, earlier in november, that he had cheated on her during the course of their
relationship. they exchanged text messages which were filed in evidence.
ms.
yu testified that mr. liu attended her apartment building where he waited from
about 1 to 6 pm, in an effort to apologize for his conduct. they argued
including over the phone, and around 6 pm, she finally met with him. he drove
her to a dance class downtown and returned to pick her up after her class. they
then decided to go eat at a restaurant in scarborough.
ms.
yu explained that they ordered their food and mr. liu apologized. they had an
argument and ms. yu ended up leaving the restaurant before eating. she planned
to take an uber home, but mr. liu followed her out and said he would drive her.
at
first, ms. yu did not want to get in the car as she was very angry, but he
persuaded her. she wanted to hear what he had to say. she says he was holding
her underarm but not in a violent way – like “pushing her but without force”. this
constitutes one of the ways in which the charge of assault is said to have been
made out.
ms.
yu then testified that once they got into the vehicle, mr. liu took out a gun that
was hidden in the car. she had sat in the back seat, and he entered the back
seat as well after retrieving the gun from the driver’s door. ms. yu indicated
that she had seen the gun many times before. she identified a picture of a gun
that resembles a handgun.
mr.
liu was agitated and asked her what he could do for her to believe him (that he
had not cheated on her). he took out a large kitchen knife from the back door driver’s
side seat and was waiving the knife and gun – in turn – in front of her, saying
he was going to injure himself. he was trying to persuade her to take the gun
and strike him. they were seated about a meter apart, and though she did not
recall specifically, the weapons may have come within a half meter of her. this
is the other way in which the crown says the assault charge is made out, given
that a threatening action where the person has the present ability to effect his
purpose can constitute an assault under s. 265(1)(b) of the
code
.
ms.
yu stated she was in a panic because she wasn’t sure whether mr. liu would do
something terrifying and mistakenly injure her or himself. she was shocked and
scared and did not believe he would really do such a thing. she then confronted
him and stabilized him emotionally, and he put the weapons down, on the arms
between the two front seats. they were later placed in the back side door, and
mr. liu drove ms. yu home. they continued to argue on the way home.
ms.
yu also testified that there was another longer gun in the car, in the middle
area between the front and back seats. it was in a bag, but she had seen the
gun and bag previously, in mr. liu’s apartment.
the
text messages later exchanged between ms. yu and mr. liu corroborate the fact
that mr. liu threatened himself in a manner at least akin to what ms. yu
described. indeed, mr. liu later explains his conduct to ms. yu, referencing
both a gun and knife. he states that there was some issue with his emotions, he
was under a lot of stress, and that he wanted her to forgive him instead of
hurting her. he explained the knife as follows: since she was capable of doing
that to herself, so was he – he wanted to prove it to her. he wanted to show
that they are the same. these paraphrased messages were communicated in
mandarin.
some
aspects of ms. yu’s account of the encounter however were undermined in cross-examination.
for
instance, ms. yu gave the police text messages from december 4
th
that
suggested she had categorically refused to meet with mr. liu that day. in
testimony, she denied the suggestion that she invited mr. liu over or that it
was her idea to meet. her account was that he persisted in his efforts to meet
with her in the face of her refusals, waiting downstairs for her for hours.
ms.
yu acknowledged that she selected and provided the police with those text
messages that could prove what she was saying – she did not provide the entire
record to the police. she did not provide text messages that immediately
preceded the above-referenced messages.
in
this earlier message exchange, ms. yu texted “of course we are going to meet,”
as she wanted mr. liu to face her in relation to his cheating. she later
reiterates that they are going to meet as she needs to see how happy or nervous
he is.
it
can also be inferred from these earlier messages, sent beginning at 1:18 pm, that
mr. liu was initially elsewhere. it is only after the message where she
indicates that they will meet that he makes his way to her apartment building,
arriving around 3:26 pm. she then changes her mind about meeting, and says she
won’t because she is afraid she will kill him with a knife.
after
reiterating that she does not want to meet, ms. yu texts mr. liu that if he
really wants to show he is sorry, he can e-transfer her some money, stating
that is better than anything else. she then sent an email address, requesting $1,000.
she explained that this was intended to get him to leave her apartment building,
because she knew he was not going to pay her. she however added that she felt
he should compensate her financially because he had her restrict her social
media which had been a source of income for her.
after
reiterating “no etransfer, no talk” and “just empty promises, will wait until i
receive payment”, mr. liu seeks to confirm that she will not meet with him. at
4:27 pm, she then suddenly asks him if 6 pm is ok, and asks if he’s eaten. mr.
liu ultimately reattends her home to drive her to dance class for 6:30 pm.
i
can infer that ms. yu was aware that he was no longer at her building because
she texts him to “hurry up and get here”, and he says he is coming. this is
followed by “are you here yet, i need to leave.” after her dance class, she
suggested that they go out for lamb soup (to a restaurant she initially claimed
not to like, having chosen it because it was cheap – yet later in
cross-examination stating she chose it in part because they used to go there
often as they have “quite yummy soup”).
this
exchange contrasts with ms. yu’s initial account that mr. liu stayed at her
building from 1 to 6 pm, in an effort to meet with her against her wishes. they
contradict her testimony in chief which i find purposely sought to cast mr. liu
in a bad light. these and other text messages filed also show ms. yu’s aptitude
for manipulation.
the
above concerns and the other serious credibility issues i have previously
identified lead me to have a great deal of distrust for ms. yu’s account of how
events unfolded on december 4, 2022.
assault
the
crown relies on the fact that mr. liu is said to have waved the knife and
airsoft handgun around in the car – a confined space – to justify convictions
on all counts relating to the events of december 4, 2022, including the count
of assault.
indeed,
and although there was some suggestion during the trial that the assault
related to mr. liu grabbing or pulling ms. yu’s arm to get her into his car,
the crown in closing submissions emphasized the threat by action in mr. liu brandishing
the weapons and having the present ability to effect his purpose, as providing
a route to conviction under s. 265(1)(b) of the
code
.
and
yet – even leaving aside ms. yu’s credibility issues – there is a lack of
specificity to her evidence on this point. ms. yu explained that they were
seated about a meter apart in the back seat of the car and guessed that the
weapons may have come within a half meter of her – but she did not in fact
specifically recall this. ms. yu did not describe how the two weapons were
being waved, towards whom, or even whether mr. liu was holding them at the same
time. nor do i know how he was holding them. she never stated that he was
waving them in her direction or that he approached her with them.
i
simply do not know anything beyond the fact that ms. yu says he waved them. and
the gist of her evidence was that mr. liu was threatening himself with them. he
even offered her the gun so that she could strike him with it. when asked what
she feared, ms. yu stated that she was afraid he would “mistakenly” injure
himself or herself. this implied that she did not perceive this to be his
intent – only that an accident could occur.
though
the parties were admittedly in a confined space and any weapon being brandished
could certainly be intimidating and indeed threatening, i am not prepared to rely
on ms. yu’s account that mr. liu’s gestures inside the car were threatening to
anyone but himself. i have already discussed above my reasons for being unable
to believe ms. yu’s characterization of events or the details of how these
events unfolded.
the
threat must be to another person to constitute an assault. i am unable to find
that the
actus reus
has been made out in the present case, nor would i
be prepared to find that the requisite
mens rea
has been proved, as it
relates to the threatening gestures related to the knife or bb handgun.
similarly,
i find insufficient evidence of an assault based on mr. liu taking ms. yu’s arm
prior to entering the car.
on
ms. yu’s evidence, mr. liu pulled on her arm gently, and at a time when she was
persuaded to get in the car for him to drive her home. in response to the
crown’s question about whether she wanted or consented to being touched in that
way, ms. yu stated that she did not because she had already ordered an uber.
i
have referred to ms. yu’s manipulative tendencies above. the evidence reveals a
pattern of her going back and forth on her stated intentions, or claiming
something when she meant the opposite. i am not prepared to accept that she had
even ordered an uber or contacted a friend to order an uber for her, as her
evidence on the point was contradictory and made little sense. in my view,
telling mr. liu that she had an uber on the way was just another instance of
making him believe something that was not true. it is clear from the evidence
that despite storming out of the restaurant, she wanted mr. liu to follow her
and she continued to want to hear what he had to say. as she ultimately
accepted, she was content to follow him in his car to hear him out.
altogether
then, i have a doubt on the issue of consent to the touching given the many
hidden and fluid intentions behind her statements. ms. yu also admitted to the
possibility that mr. liu took her arm when she was walking away from him into
the roadway, such that he was bringing her back onto the sidewalk for her own
safety.
in
any event, if an assault had been made out on the basis of the arm tug, i would
have found that it was
de minimis
, such that no offence was committed.
mr.
liu is acquitted on count six.
forcible confinement
the
crown’s position is that mr. liu confined ms. yu in the car by using the
weapons or imitation weapon towards her in an intimidating manner. it argues
that this created a psychological restraint on ms. yu.
i
find no evidence of either physical or psychological confinement or restraint
to support this charge.
when
asked in direct examination whether she felt she could leave the vehicle, ms.
yu hesitated, stating she was not sure. she said she did not leave when he had
the gun and knife in hand because she did not know what to do. ms. yu simply
did not provide any direct evidence that she felt herself confined because of
mr. liu’s actions. even if she had provided evidence of psychological
restraint, i would not have been prepared to accept it beyond a reasonable
doubt.
as
set out above, i am unable to find that the weapons were waved toward her or
directed at her in any way. the evidence points to the contrary.
i
also find that ms. yu at this time understood that the airsoft bb handgun that
mr. liu held in his hand was not a real firearm. i have already found that ms.
yu’s claim that she believed mr. liu had real firearms at home because he was a
police officer cannot be believed.
ms.
yu recognized the firearm in the car as the one she had previously seen in his
apartment. mr. liu had also previously shown her a picture of the weapon and
indicated it was an airsoft gun. while she may well not have understood quite
what that meant, as she testified, she did not ask for clarification at that
time. her testimony that she believed an airsoft gun was something that could
be used for hunting is inconsistent with the reason she believed he owned the
weapon – because he was a police officer. as indicated, i do not accept her
evidence that she nevertheless believed that it was real because she believed mr.
liu to be a police officer. in my assessment, ms. yu understood that mr. liu
was not a police officer and that his airsoft gun was not a real firearm.
while
the knife was very real, and the events as described could well inspire fear in
any person, i am unable to accept her evidence or infer from it that she was intimidated
or genuinely fearful during or as a result of this incident. i am simply unable
to rely on her account of how she felt, given her tendency to misrepresent her
feelings to manipulate or communicate something to mr. liu, including in court.
it seems to me that, during the car episode, ms. yu may have in fact been
interested to see just how far mr. liu would go to prove that he felt
remorseful or cared for her. (on that point, ms. yu was inconsistent in her
evidence about what mr. liu was conveying to her. she both stated that mr. liu
was apologetic, and that he was trying to persuade her that he had not in fact
cheated on her). at most, she seemed to want to remain in the car to ensure
that mr. liu did not harm himself.
to
be sure, ms. yu also acknowledged in her testimony that although she initially
wanted to take an uber home, she voluntarily went into mr. liu’s car – that he
said something persuasive, so she voluntarily went in.
ms.
yu ultimately did exit the car from the backseat, where she had been sitting
when the alleged incident took place, to enter the front seat for the drive
home. this demonstrates that she was not restrained or forcefully confined at
that time. it also undermines the suggestion that she was so confined prior to
that moment in time.
ultimately,
there is insufficient evidence of any forcible
confinement
and an
acquittal on count seven will follow.
possession of a weapon or imitation weapon for a
dangerous purpose
mr.
liu is charged with possessing the knife and airsoft handgun on december 4
th
for a dangerous purpose. the crown’s position is that the dangerous purpose
relates to mr. liu waving these weapons around in the car in proximity to ms.
yu and placing them on the console in a manner that would have been
intimidating.
i
have already set out the evidentiary weaknesses relating to the evidence of mr.
liu waving the weapons around in proximity to ms. yu. i similarly cannot find,
based on the evidence and the very real issues with ms. yu’s testimony, that
the weapons being placed on the center console once mr. liu had started to calm
down was threatening in any way or made her feel threatened. this was instead a
de-escalation of a situation that i was unable to find was threatening towards
her in the first place. on her own evidence, she had by then taken control of
the situation by confronting him, at which point he put them down. she then
believes she put the weapons away in the side of the door.
ms.
yu’s evidence was clearly that mr. liu used the weapons or imitation weapon
against himself. on her version, he was threatening himself, not her. he was
saying that he was going to injure himself and was trying to persuade ms. yu to
take the gun and strike him with it.
in
subsequent text messages, when ms. yu questioned why he had brought the knife
and gun with him in the car, mr. liu wrote that he was emotional, and that he wanted
her to forgive him instead of hurting her. he added that he brought the knife
because “since you were capable of doing that to yourself, so was i. i wanted
to prove it to you”. he reiterated that again and added “it’s like we are the
same”.
this
is consistent with ms. yu’s account that he was trying to gain her forgiveness
by threatening to harm himself.
ms.
yu had previously resorted to the same kind of actions and conveyed them to mr.
liu in an apparent effort to garner his sympathy or attention. indeed, despite
denying that that was her intention in self-harming, she sent mr. liu a picture
of harm she had occasioned to herself and wrote that she was looking for
someone to be with her. at another point when she again self-harmed, she wrote
that she missed him a lot, that she wanted to be able not to love him anymore,
and that she was going crazy.
ms.
yu acknowledged in cross-examination that mr. liu told her that he did it to
demonstrate his love and affection for her, and that he would do exactly what
she had done in the past, which was to harm himself. she also agreed that he
may have said if she didn’t forgive him, he was prepared to do as she did and
that was to harm himself.
it
has not been suggested in this trial that threatening oneself with a weapon is
a purpose that is contrary to the public peace. without deciding the issue, it
may be that scaring someone into believing that they will harm themselves could
be sufficient to make out the offence. but if the ultimate purpose is self-harm
or the threat of self-harm to gain sympathy from another, i do not think it
falls within the ambit of the
criminal code
provision of possessing a
weapon or an imitation weapon for a dangerous purpose. if it were, one could
question whether ms. yu’s own actions in harming herself or threatening to harm
herself and the manner in which that was conveyed to mr. liu, could constitute
the offence of using a weapon for a purpose contrary to the public peace.
the
defence submits that mr. liu’s purpose here was to gain sympathy from ms. yu. even
though mr. liu did not testify, this is an inference that may reasonably be
drawn from the whole of the evidence, and that i cannot exclude beyond a
reasonable doubt. inferences other than guilt do not have to arise from proven
facts to raise a reasonable doubt, so long as they are reasonable:
r. v. villaroman
,
2016 scc 33
, at paras.
36-37
.
though the test is
a subjective-objective one, the crown must prove that the accused’s purpose
was, in all the circumstances, objectively one that is dangerous to the public
peace:
r. v. kerr
,
2004 scc 44
, at para.
25
. i am not satisfied that the
crown has proven this element of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
mr. liu is
therefore acquitted of counts nine and ten.
criminal harassment
finally, the
crown argues that mr. liu harassed ms. yu under s. 264(2)(d) by engaging in
threatening conduct directed at ms. yu, based on his use of a weapon in the car
on december 4, 2022.
while a single
incident can constitute threatening conduct amounting to harassment under this
subsection, the crown must prove not only that the threatening conduct was
directed at ms. yu, but that ms. yu felt harassed and reasonably feared for her
safety:
r. v. kosikar
,
1999 canlii 3775 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3569 (c.a.), at paras.
19-22
.
i have already found
there to be insufficient evidence that mr. liu’s threatening conduct in the car
was directed at ms. yu. i also do not accept beyond a reasonable doubt that ms.
yu felt harassed or feared for her safety.
the court of
appeal defined the feeling of being harassed as feeling “tormented, troubled,
worried continually or chronically, plagued, bedeviled and badgered”:
kosikar
,
at para.
25
. these terms however are not cumulative:
r. v. kordrostami
,
2000 canlii 5670 (on ca)
,
o.j. no. 613 (c.a.) at para.
11
.
at its highest,
ms. yu testified that she was afraid because she did not know if mr. liu was
mistakenly going to injure himself or herself. i do not accept that she felt harassed,
as that is defined in the jurisprudence. there was no “sense of being subject
to ongoing torment”:
kosikar
, at para.
25
.
ms. yu testified
that mr. liu had not previously been violent with her or been physical in any
way.
her conduct
immediately following this incident is also relevant to this issue. ms. yu
testified that she continued to see mr. liu in the days following december 4
th
.
they texted daily and on various occasions, she willingly got back in his car
with him. they again went out for food by themselves.
there was no
suggestion that she did this because she felt threatened, or that she was
scared and was acting normally to ensure he remained calm. rather, she
testified that she continued seeing him and eating out with him in the following
days because he had “not caused her any real damage” and she wanted to hear his
explanation about his behaviour. it is also clear from her actions around that
time that she wanted to gather evidence against him.
the crown argues
that there is no requirement that the complainant continue to feel scared in
the days following, pointing out that people react differently, especially in a
domestic context.
be that as it
may, ms. yu’s conduct in this case in the days following december 4
th
belies
the suggestion that she felt threatened or had safety concerns flowing from this
incident.
given these
issues and the numerous credibility problems i have set out above, i am not
prepared to accept ms. yu’s evidence that she felt afraid or intimidated or threatened
by mr. liu’s possession and use of the knife and airsoft gun in the car.
as already
stated, there is also no evidence that the weapons were turned on ms. yu or
brandished at her. i have found that the only threat mr. liu made was to
himself.
an acquittal
will follow on count eight. mr. liu is therefore acquitted on all counts.
released:  march
28, 2025
signed:
justice c. mainville