ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. k.b.
, 2025 oncj 35
date:
2025 01 20
court
file no.:  newmarket 23-91103344
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
k.b.
before
justice m. townsend
sentencing
submissions heard on october 10, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 20, 2025
m. henry................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
p. sherman.............................................................................. counsel
for the accused k.b.
townsend j.:
on august 16
th
, 2024 i acquitted k.b.
of two counts of assault on his former spouse h.b., but convicted him of one
count of sexual assault of h.b. on may 29
th
, 2021.
sentencing submissions were heard on october 10
th
,
2024, and the matter was adjourned to january 20
th
, 2025 for
sentence as k.b. was expecting a baby with his new partner, and he wished to be
present for the birth of that child, and be with his new child over the holiday
season.
overview of the facts:
mr. and h.b. met in july or august 2018, and
progressed quickly to moving in together in november 2018. about a year later
in november 2019, h.b. became pregnant with their daughter ha.
h.b. is 34 years of age, she works for a
healthcare union, and she has one child which she shares with k.b., their now
5-year-old daughter ha. the two of them married in march of 2020 and ha. was
born in august of 2020.
in february 2019, h.b. said that the stress in
their relationship led to some violence. there was constant fighting, h.b.
threatened to move out, and apparently that is when k.b. started to “relapse”
with cocaine use. h.b. testified that in february 2019, k.b. would throw
things, there was a lot of yelling, and at times it got physical. according to h.b.,
k.b. would apologize for relapsing, and then guilt her into staying in the
relationship.
i acquitted k.b. of two counts of assault on h.b.,
alleged to have happened in february and march 2019.
the pregnancy with ha. was not easy for h.b.,
she was frequently sick, and again, this put a strain on the relationship. ha.
was born in august 2020 and according to h.b. in november 2020 their
relationship was essentially over. despite this they tried to attend couples
therapy together in december 2020, and then in february 2021 – because h.b. was
still on maternity leave – they moved into k.b.’s parents’ house.
in may of 2021 k.b. was living in the basement.
he would come upstairs every now and then to their shared room for shower and
clothes, etc., but for all intents and purposes h.b. and ha. were living
upstairs in the house, and k.b. was living in the basement. also in may 2021
almost everyone in the house got sick with covid, so people were trying to
isolate from one another.
on may 29th, 2021, ha. was in her room sleeping
and h.b. was in her room taking her makeup off and getting ready for bed. she
said that k.b. was standing in her room demanding to have sex with her and told
her to take her clothes off. she said no to the sex, he got mad, called her a
name and then left. this was around 9:30 pm or 10:00 pm.
this interaction made h.b. quite mad.
apparently, k.b. had been disrespecting her all day, and then he demanded to
have sex with her. not something that h.b. was interested in at all.
h.b. closed the door, put her earplugs in and
went to sleep. the next thing she remembers is being awoken while k.b. is on
top of her. she was sleeping on her stomach with one knee up to her side.
she realized when she woke up that k.b. had his
penis inside her and was having sex with her. she said, “what are you doing,”
to which he replied by telling her to shut up, that she liked it, and he kept
going. h.b. said that it was over “in like two minutes”. she also felt his
hands on her back.
when it finished, h.b. asked k.b., “what the
hell was that?” k.b. just left. h.b. said that she could smell on his breath
that he appeared to be intoxicated.
early the next morning h.b. confronted k.b.. she
challenged him on what happened the night before, that they had not been intimate
together in months and that she did not consent to what had happened. she said,
“you don’t just come into my room and especially do that – when i already told
you no.” k.b.’s reply – according to h.b. – was that he was drunk and “you were
just a hole.”
that day, h.b. told her mother-in-law, and her
best friend m. about the sexual assault. h.b. did not call the police that day,
but instead called the police about a year later, in april 2022. she attributes
this delay in reporting to the break-up in the relationship, her postpartum,
and her journey through therapy. after the sexual assault, she eventually moved
out of k.b.’s parents’ place.
k.b. testified that the sex between the two was
consensual. i rejected this submission as outlined in my reasons for judgment
and convicted k.b..
victim impact statement
h.b. provided a victim impact statement that was
read onto the record. in that statement h.b. provides that the emotional impact
that this incident has had on her has been significantly damaging. she
indicates that as a result of the relationship that she was in with k.b., she
lost a lot of the support that she had in her friends and family members. she
tried to leave the relationship, but when she found out that she was pregnant
she decided to stay.
after giving birth to their daughter, h.b.
suffered extreme postpartum, and has been on medication for anxiety and panic
ever since.
since the assaults, h.b. has described being
fearful in many situations, has difficulty trusting people, is constantly on
edge and worried that assaults of this nature may happen again. h.b. indicates
that intimacy, both physical and emotional, is difficult, and she feels distant
from loved ones.
she described the very negative relationship
that she had with k.b. and said that when with k.b. she was “treated worse than
dirt on the ground”. the sexual assault at the hands of k.b. has affected
almost every facet of her daily life. she noted that “the trauma from the
assault has created a deep fear in me”.
circumstances of the offender and pre-sentence
report (“psr”)
generally speaking, the pre-sentence report
prepared on behalf of k.b. is a positive one. it outlines the very positive
relationships that he has with his current partner, his family, and his past
and current employers. k.b. is employed with terra cotta construction
full-time, and his employer is quite happy with him.
while all individuals – inclusive of k.b. – all
indicate that there are no concerns, or they are unaware of any substance use
issues for k.b., this issue came up in the trial. eventually in the psr k.b.
admitted that he had an issue with drugs in the past, to the extent that he
utilized his employee assistance program in 2017 and entered a 5-week treatment
centre.
k.b.’s use of alcohol and drugs is something
that he and h.b. fought about in their relationship frequently. alcohol and
drugs played a role in the sexual assault. k.b.’s current partner indicates
that their home is an “alcohol-free” home, and there are no concerns on her, k.b.’s,
or his family’s part with respect to the use of any illegal drug.
k.b. was diagnosed in the past with adhd and is
on medication for that. there are no mental health concerns for k.b.
k.b. continues to proclaim his innocence and
blames h.b. as being responsible for his involvement in these offences. lack of
remorse, and an inability to accept responsibility for his actions are not
aggravating factors on sentence, simply lack of these as mitigating factors. k.b.
is willing however to acknowledge the tumultuous nature of the relationship
with h.b., regrets any role he played in that, but denies any sexual assault.
k.b. is 33 years of age and appears to be in a
very positive new relationship with his partner ms. e. she is very supportive
of him and is confident in their ability to raise their new baby alongside the
daughter that k.b. shares with h.b.
k.b. has no prior criminal record, and no past
history of violence. ms. e. reports no violence in their relationship.
when asked if there is anything he wished to say
prior to sentencing, k.b. indicated that he does not want this incident to
define him, he wants to be a good father to his children and wants to be there
for his family and his partner in the best way that he can.
positions of the parties
the crown position is that a sentence of 4 years
in the penitentiary is appropriate in the circumstances. this should be
accompanied by a
soira
order for 20 years, a dna order and a section 109
order for 10 years.
counsel for k.b. submits that a conditional
sentence of 18 months to 2 years is appropriate given the circumstances of the
offence and the circumstances of the offender.
counsel for k.b. submits that this offence was
carried out more by stealth than by force, and there was a very low level of
violence. there was no significant force, or the existence of threats.
by way of mitigation, k.b. comes before the
court with no record, and no prior history of violence. despite being in
arrears on his child support payments, and court costs, k.b. is an otherwise
contributing member of society. he is employed, he has a very supportive
family, and he has displayed considerable strength in overcoming his past
substance and alcohol abuse issues. he has been on release since his arrest
without incident. he has a new partner, and a new baby.
in terms of significant aggravating factors,
this sexual assault took place in a domestic relationship. it occurred while h.b.
was sleeping. they were separated at the time, living in different areas of the
residence. this was a penetrative sexual assault.
analysis and the law
section 718
of the
criminal code of canada
instructs that the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society and to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, the respect for the law
and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society through the
imposition of just sanctions.
as a sentencing judge, i attempt to achieve this
goal by imposing a sanction that addresses one or more of the traditional
sentencing principles as further outlined in
section 718
the
criminal code
.
these include denunciation, general and specific deterrence, rehabilitation,
making reparation to victims of crime, and promoting a sense of responsibility
in offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm they have caused the community,
and specific victims in our community.
one of the fundamental principles of sentencing
is to impose a sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence
committed, and the degree of responsibility of the person who committed it.
this means that, for the sentence i impose to be appropriate, it must be
tailored to k.b.’s personal circumstances, and the circumstances of the offence
he committed.
the following principles as outlined in
section
718.2
of the
criminal code
are particularly relevant to sentencing
individuals convicted of sexual assault:
718.2 a court that imposes a sentence shall
also take into consideration the following principles:
(a) a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing,
…
(ii) evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
…
(iii) evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1) evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
…
shall be deemed to be aggravating
circumstances;
courts have repeatedly stated that the
principles of denunciation and deterrence are paramount objectives for
offenders who have been convicted of sexual assault. the supreme court of
canada in
r. v. barton
,
2019 scc 33 (canlii)
, 2 s.c.r. 579 recognized the devastating
effects that instances of sexual violence have on women.
given that k.b. is a first-time offender, i must
also consider his prospects for rehabilitation and the principle of restraint.
courts of appeal across the country have
repeatedly upheld sentences imposed by trial courts and continued their
recognition of the seriousness of these offences, and the devastating effect
that these crimes have on victims.
in
r. v. a.j.k.
,
2022 onca 487 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 2862
(ca), the ontario court of appeal stated:
all sexual assaults are serious acts
of violence. they reflect the wrongful exploitation of the victim whose
personal autonomy, sexual integrity, and dignity is harmfully impacted while
being treated as nothing more than an object. whether intimate partners or
strangers, victims of sexual violence suffer profound emotional and physical
harm and their lives can be forever altered. so, too, can the lives of their
loved ones.
as the years pass, enlightenment on
the implications of sexual violence continues to permeate our conscious minds.
in
friesen
, the court noted, at para. 118, that "our understanding
of the profound physical and psychological harm that all victims of sexual
assault experience has deepened" and, i would add, is continuing to
deepen: see also
r. v. goldfinch
,
2019 scc 38
, 3 s.c.r. 3, at
para.
37
. as moldaver j. stated in
r. v. barton
,
2019 scc 33
, 2
s.c.r. 579, at para.
1
: "without a doubt, eliminating ... sexual violence
against women is one of the more pressing challenges we face as a society"
and "we can - and must- do better" (emphasis in original). this
comment encapsulates why these sentencing ranges as they have come to be
understood must be reconciled.
there is no justifiable reason for why
sexually assaulting an intimate or former intimate partner is any less serious
than sexually assaulting a stranger. the fact is that a pre-existing
relationship between the accused and complainant places them in a position of
trust that can only be seen as an aggravating factor on sentencing:
criminal
code
, r.s.c., 1985, c. c-46, s. 718.2(a)(ii). therefore, contrary to the
impression that may be left when contrasting the
smith
range with the
non-
smith
range, the sexual assault of an intimate or former intimate
partner can actually attract a greater sentence.
in
r. v. maslehati
,
b.c.j. no.
1000 (ca)
the british colombia court of appeal stated at paragraph 72 that all
sexual assaults are "serious". the saskatchewan court of appeal in
r.
v. merasty
,
s.j. no. 92 (ca) stated at paragraph 23
, "[no] matter
what form it takes, a sexual assault is a forceful subjection of the victim to
their assailant's sexual desires.". there must be a reflection in
contemporary sentencing judgments of our "deepening understanding"
surrounding the harm caused by sexual assaults: see
r. v. bunn
,
2022 mbca 34 (canlii)
,
m.j. no. 96 (ca).
counsel for k.b. relies on the cases of
r. v.
holland
,
2022 onsc 1540 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 1611 (scj),
r. v. browne
,
o.j. no.
5258 (scj)
,
r. v. killam
,
1999 canlii 2489 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 4289 (ca), and
r. v.
nikkanen
,
1999 canlii 7339 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 3822 (ca).
in each of these cases, a conditional sentence
of imprisonment was imposed. i note however that each of these cases can be
distinguished on the basis of their facts and the personal circumstances of the
offender. as well, each of these cases was decided before the decision of the
ontario court of appeal in
r. v. a.j.k.
in
r. v. killam
, justice doherty made the
following comments with respect to the appropriateness of a conditional
sentence for sexual assault offences:
that leaves for consideration the
principles of general deterrence and denunciation. i am particularly concerned
about denunciation. as indicated in
r. v. wismayer
(1997),
1997 canlii 3294 (on ca)
, 115 c.c.c.
(3d) 18 (ont. c.a.), a conditional sentence, if properly understood, can
adequately address the needs of denunciation and general deterrence even in
cases where those principles are paramount. i think, however, it must be
acknowledged that a conditional sentence, even one like this one which imposes
some significant restrictions on the offender's liberty, does not, generally
speaking, have the same denunciatory effect as a period of imprisonment.
incarceration remains the most formidable denunciatory weapon in the sentencing
arsenal.
i admit to considerable doubt as to
whether a conditional sentence could adequately reflect the gravity of this
offence and send the proper denunciatory message to the public. i am, however,
satisfied that the case law commands that my doubt yield to the deference that
must be afforded to the decision made by the trial judge. as lamer c.j.c. put
it in
r. v. m.(c.a.)
1996 canlii 230 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 500 at 566:
the sentencing
judge still enjoys a position of advantage over an appellate judge in being
able to directly assess the sentencing submissions of both the crown and the
offender. a sentencing judge also possesses unique qualifications of experience
and judgment from having served on the front lines of our criminal justice
system. perhaps most importantly, the sentencing judge will normally preside
near or within the community which has suffered the consequences of the
offender's crime. as such, the sentencing judge will have a strong sense of the
particular blend of sentencing goals that will be "just and
appropriate" for the protection of that community.
…
i must stress, i am not suggesting
that a conditional sentence should become the norm in cases like this one. far
from it. my reasons should be taken only as indicating that in the
circumstances of this case, a conditional sentence was not outside the broad
range of sentences available to the trial judge. i do not suggest that other
sentences, particular a significant term of imprisonment, would have been
inappropriate. indeed, i might even go so far as to say a period of
incarceration would have been more appropriate. that is, however, a basis upon
which i cannot vary a sentence under
s. 687
of the
criminal code
.
with respect to the sentencing range in cases
involving the penetrative sexual assault of an intimate partner,
r. v.
a.j.k.
is particularly instructive:
the supreme court recently reiterated
that ranges and starting points are malleable products of their time. they are
"historical portraits" that provide insight into the operative
precedents of the day, but they are not "straitjackets" and can be
departed from as societal understanding of offences and the severity of harm
arising from those offences deepens: see
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
,
3 s.c.r. 1089, at paras.
57
;
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, 444
d.l.r. (4th) 1, at para.
108
. to that end, it is not unusual "for
sentences to increase and decrease as societal and judicial knowledge and
attitudes about certain offences change":
r. v. parranto
,
2021 scc
46
, 436 d.l.r. (4th) 389, at para.
22
, citing
r. v. smith
,
2017 bcca
112
, at para.
36
, citing
r. v. nur
,
2011 onsc 4874
, 275 c.c.c. (3d) 330,
at para.
49
;
friesen
, at para.
108
.
…
there is no justifiable reason for why
sexually assaulting an intimate or former intimate partner is any less serious
than sexually assaulting a stranger. the fact is that a pre-existing
relationship between the accused and complainant places them in a position of
trust that can only be seen as an aggravating factor on sentencing:
criminal
code
, r.s.c., 1985, c. c-46, s. 718.2(a)(ii). therefore, contrary to the
impression that may be left when contrasting the
smith
range with the
non-
smith
range, the sexual assault of an intimate or former intimate
partner can actually attract a greater sentence.
the fact that the complainant had a
relationship or prior relationship with the accused cannot serve to justify a
sentencing range below a range for non-intimate partner sexual violence. to the
extent that the smith has been interpreted as suggesting otherwise, it is no
longer to be understood this way. absent some highly mitigating factor, the
forced penetration of another person will typically attract a sentence of at
least three years in the penitentiary. while
bradley
and the cases
following it suggest that the range is three to five years, this is of course
just a range, a quantitative sentencing tool designed to assist busy trial
judges with where to start:
parranto
, at paras.
15-17
. accordingly,
there will be circumstances where a departure from the range, either above or
below the range, is entirely appropriate.
conclusion
k.b. has been convicted of the offence of sexual
assault. this was one instance of penetrative sexual assault on his former
spouse. they were going through a separation at the time, living in the same
residence, the sexual assault started while h.b. was sleeping, and prior to the
sexual assault h.b. clearly told k.b. that she was not interested in any type
of sexual contact.
k.b. demonstrated a callous disregard for h.b.,
and his comments to her upon confrontation demonstrate this - “you were just a
hole”. this offence has had a significant impact on h.b. there are no
mitigating factors like those present in the cases i received or alluded to in
r.
v. a.j.k.
that would allow for a reduction in sentence. this is a serious
offence and k.b.’s moral culpability is high despite the fact that he is a first-time
offender.
general deterrence and denunciation are
paramount principles of sentencing. the sexual assault of a current or former
intimate partner is a serious offence that ought to attract a significant
sentence. vulnerable victims need to be protected. society needs to know that
these offences are taken seriously, offenders will be held accountable, and
sentences imposed will reflect the serious harm that these offences have on
victims.
i have turned my mind to all the principles of
sentencing as set out in the
criminal code
, as well as the principle of
restraint given that k.b. has no prior criminal record. i have taken into
account all the aggravating and mitigating factors, as well as the particular
circumstances of k.b., and the impact of this offence on h.b.
sentencing someone to a period of imprisonment
is not an easy task. lives are disrupted, relationships are tested. i find that
k.b.’s prospects for rehabilitation are high. however, i am unable, given all
that i have heard about k.b., unable to reduce what would be a fair and fit
sentence to a sentence below two years to consider a conditional sentence. to
do so on these facts would be to impose a sentence well below other offenders in
similar circumstances, resulting in an unreasonable sentence.
in all the circumstances, the sentence imposed
today will be one of three years in the penitentiary.
there will also be a dna order, a section 109
order for 10 years, and a
soira
order for 20 years.
released:  january
20, 2025
signed:
justice m. townsend