ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. aden
, 2025 oncj 3
date:
2025 01 06
court file no.:  toronto, no. 23-70006761
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
abdisatar aden
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on june 13, 2023, and december 10, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 6, 2025
d. pyper................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
d. embry / p. socka.............................................................................. counsel
for mr. aden
jones j.:
introduction
on october 11, 2022, amadou suwareh, only 18 years old, was shot three times
outside of moss park in downtown toronto. he suffered life-threatening injuries.
mercifully, he survived.
on june 12, 2023, a preliminary hearing in this matter commenced. the
crown’s primary witness, mr. suwareh, did not attend despite being served with
a subpoena. i issued a material witness warrant for his arrest. officers
located him the same day and brought him to court.
the next day, abdisatar aden re-elected to be tried in the ontario court
of justice and pleaded guilty to four offences:
•
discharge firearm endangering life, contrary to
criminal code
section
244(1);
•
aggravated assault, contrary to
criminal code
section
268(2);
•
possession of a loaded, prohibited firearm contrary to
criminal
code
section 95(1); and
•
possession of a firearm contrary to a prohibition order made
under
section 109
of the
criminal code
,
contrary to
criminal code
section
117.01.
sentencing was adjourned to obtain an enhanced pre-sentence report
(“epsr”) from the sentencing and parole project. unfortunately, the report took
well over a year to complete.
on december 10, 2024, a sentencing hearing was conducted. i reserved my
decision. these are my written reasons.
facts in support of the guilty pleas
a detailed agreed statement of facts was filed the day mr. aden pleaded
guilty. i have summarized its contents for this decision.
on the afternoon of october 11, 2022, tps officer gholamali and
jennifer wellman, a mobile crisis intervention team nurse, were travelling
eastbound on shuter street in toronto. as they approached sherbourne street,
near moss park, they heard gunshots.
they attended to the scene. nurse wellman located amadou suwareh lying
on his back on the west side of sherbourne street. he suffered three gunshot
wounds - one each to his chest, abdomen, and arm. emergency medical services
arrived at 5:14 p.m. mr. suwareh was taken to st. michael’s hospital. he
required emergency surgery.
pc gholamali observed mr. aden approaching 155 sherbourne street. a
pedestrian pointed out mr. aden. pc gholamali noticed mr. aden was holding a
black firearm. mr. aden ran north and east through a laneway in between 149 and
155 sherbourne street. during the foot pursuit, mr. aden dropped the firearm. he
was arrested after a short time.
mr.
aden was transported to 51 division. he was searched. officers located 11.08
grams of crack cocaine, which he possessed for the purpose of trafficking.
forensic
identification officers attended the division and swabbed mr. aden’s
hands. those swabs were submitted to the centre of forensic sciences. an
analysis of the swabs located the presence of at least one gunshot residue
particle.
pc
velasco arrived at sherbourne and queen st. at 5:15 p.m. a male person directed
him to a garbage bin. inside this bin, he located a loaded, black, 9mm glock
luger handgun. the firearm was seized. a subsequent examination revealed there
were 14 rounds of ammunition in an overcapacity magazine capable of holding 17
rounds. the firearm was equipped with a fire selector switch that could change
the firearm's action from semi-automatic to fully automatic.
pc
fenech attended the scene and located three shell casings in the area where mr.
suwareh was located.
at
the time of these offences, mr. aden was prohibited from possessing any
firearms for life due to a
criminal code
section 109 weapons prohibition
order imposed by justice borenstein of the ontario court of justice on november
14, 2019.
mr.
suwareh remained in the icu for eight days and at the hospital for three weeks.
he sustained a severely displaced fracture of his right humerus, a grade ii
laceration of the right liver lobe measuring 2.9 cm, a grade iv acute traumatic
injury to his right kidney, and a lacerated lung and diaphragm that resulted in
a lung collapse. he required two surgeries. he continues to suffer from limited
mobility in his right hand due to the fracture of his right humerus.
video exhibits
during
the sentencing hearing, mr. pyper played video surveillance footage. a camera
mounted on a building in the area did not record the shooting itself but did
record the accused, victim, and other persons immediately afterwards as they
came into its view. mr. suwareh can be seen stumbling around until he collapses
near the corner of queen st and sherbourne street. at the time of the shooting,
there were several other men present, all of whom were visibly startled once
the firearm was discharged. some fled the area, presumably out of fear for
their own safety.
mr.
pyper also played the body-worn camera footage of officer gholamali after he
began his pursuit of mr. aden, who ran from the scene of the shooting. mr. aden
threw the firearm away, and officer gholamali was unable to retrieve it
immediately as he raced to catch mr. aden.
prior criminal record
mr.
aden has a criminal record which consists of two entries. on april 11, 2018, he
was found guilty of robbery and sentenced to an effective 5-month sentence
followed by 15 months’ probation and a mandatory
section 109
prohibition order.
on november 14, 2019, he was found guilty of careless storage of a firearm,
possession of a firearm contrary to a prohibition order, and possession of a loaded
prohibited or restricted firearm. he was sentenced to 24 months in jail in
addition to credit for 533 days of pre-sentence custody. another section 109
order was imposed as well.
background of the offender
mr.
aden is 32 years old. he was born on june 1, 1992, in nairobi, kenya. he is the
oldest of six children. he has the same father as one of his brothers. the
remaining siblings result from his mother’s relationship with his stepfather. mr.
aden has been in a relationship with his girlfriend since 2019, but they do not
have any children.
his
mother is ms. deqo garad. she was born and raised in mogadishu, somalia.
following the inception of a civil war in 1992, she fled to kenya. she migrated
to canada in 1993 and settled in toronto in a shelter. after two months, she secured
subsidized housing in regent park.
mr.
aden reported that his childhood was generally positive. he has a good
relationship with his mother, who worked hard to provide for the family.  mr.
aden was a role model to his younger siblings and cared for them as much as
possible.
when
he was 18 years old, an investigation was commenced by a children’s aid society.
as a result, he became the legal guardian of his five siblings. his mother and
stepfather were not permitted to reside in the home. if he had not stepped up
to protect his siblings, they would have been placed in a foster home. after
about one year, his mother returned home, and the investigation was closed. his
mother and stepfather ended their relationship.
there
was a dramatic change in his family’s financial situation at this time. his
mother struggled to support the family as a single parent. they could pay the
rent and survive, but it wasn't easy. mr. aden learned from his mother the
value of hard work and managing household finances.
most
of the families in mr. aden’s immediate neighbourhood lived in poverty. his
mother expressed concern that “everyone” was “poor and struggling.”
mr.
aden was exposed to violence, drug activity and a heightened police presence
from an early age. starting at 12 or 13, he lived with constant fear. he saw black
men getting “jumped” or engaging in fights, sometimes including guns. he and a
friend would run when they saw a car making a u-turn out of concern that a drive-by
shooting would inevitably follow. he knew people who were killed before they
reached 16. this had a traumatic effect on him.
his
mother confirmed that gun violence was a prevailing issue in the neighbourhood.
she recalled hearing gunfire and seeing casualties on the streets. she
described the poor conditions of regent park and the minimal opportunities for its
residents. after regent park began revitalizing around 2006, unfortunately,
matters did not improve for her family. to some extent, she felt the neighbourhood
had been gentrified, and poor, black members of the community were still
unfairly singled out by the police, often for minor issues.
similarly,
mr. aden felt that the lack of opportunity for men such as himself in regent
park contributed to the likelihood he would become involved in criminal
activity. he was exposed to men engaged in crime and it shaped his perspective on
“the world for what it really was.” he struggled to make positive life choices
without a supportive male role model. he accepted that he made “some bad
decisions.”
he
witnessed the police in regent park treating black youth very poorly. they
would harass people and try to instill fear into them. it is clear from how he
described his teenage years that he felt he and his friends were racially
profiled and often accused of being involved in criminal activity when there
was no basis to make such an accusation. one of his close friends, ms. s.
tesfamariyam, divulged that the impact of anti-black racism by the police
negatively affected mr. aden and how he functioned within the community.
mr.
aden did not finish high school. he dropped out after grade 11. at that point
in his life, he had taken on significant responsibility at home for his younger
siblings and needed to contribute financially to the household. at 22, he
enrolled in the city adult learning centre and obtained four credits, but
struggled to do so and chose to discontinue his education. since he has been
detained in jail, he has been waiting to complete his high school credits, but
the appropriate program has not been made available to him yet.
before
his arrest on the index offences, mr. aden worked various jobs. these include
landscaping, security, and a catering company.
regarding
the offences before the court, mr. aden explained to the author of the epsr
that he was holding the firearm “for protection,” as he had been shot in the
past and felt threatened. on the day of the shooting, he witnessed a fight and
saw the victim “grip up on the gun” and then impulsively shot him. he claimed
he “just reacted.”
victim impact statement
mr. saikou suwareh, the father of amdaou, filed a victim impact
statement. he explained that he brought his family to canada in search of a
better life. the offences have greatly affected them all. they avoid being seen
by anyone who may ask them about the shooting. it was “traumatic,” and they are
trying to put it behind them, but mr. suwareh feels anxious every time his son
ventures into the city.
amadou has permanent scarring from where he was shot. he “isn’t the
same person anymore.” he lacks motivation, staying in his room most of the
time, and now shows little interest in his prior passions, such as sports and
school. mr. suwareh fears that his son’s mental health has not truly recovered.
mr. aden’s allocution
mr. aden read a prepared statement to the court.
he has had time to reflect on the shooting. he has thought about what caused
him to commit the offences and what went wrong in his life. he thinks about the
effect it had on everyone in the community, including the victim and his
family. he knows he caused trauma to mr. suwareh and is reminded of that every
day. he prays to be forgiven.
he wishes he could take back his actions and
hopes to learn from this terrible mistake. he knows that he could have taken
his victim’s life, but also that he placed his own life in danger too.
position of the parties
mr.
pyper originally sought a global sentence of 11 years of incarceration on
behalf of the crown. in his submission, the discharge with intent and
aggravated assault counts justify a sentence of 10 years each, concurrent to
one another. he sought a consecutive sentence of one year for the offence of
possessing a firearm in contravention of a prohibition order, and a concurrent
sentence of six years on the unlawful possession of a loaded prohibited or
restricted firearm count.
mr.
pyper noted that the teenage victim was shot three times at point-blank range.
he was defenceless. he required multiple surgeries to recover from his injuries
and nearly died.
mr.
aden has a prior criminal record and was subject to two separate firearms
prohibition orders at the time of the shooting.
mr. pyper provided me with a chart of prior
sentencing authorities from various courts in ontario.  mr. pyper submitted
that his position is well within the established range for cases of a similar
nature.
mr.
embry submitted a sentence of six to seven years is sufficient to meet the
applicable sentencing principles given the relatively early guilty plea. while
his client’s actions were unwarranted, and he is not advancing any claim of
self-defence, mr. embry asks me to consider the context of this incident. the
video the crown relies upon also shows five men in the vicinity of his client before
the shooting. some were dressed in masks with their hoods up. mr. aden may have
experienced an “unreasonable perceived threat” and decided to shoot suddenly.
it was not a pre-meditated decision.
mr.
aden has had a difficult life. he was born in a refugee camp and has been
surrounded by and affected by violence since he was a child. he has
internalized this trauma and his experiences with systemic racism while growing
up in regent park. mr. aden will carry the impact of these difficulties with
him for his entire life. his perception of a threat must be understood by
considering his personal history.
while
it was not lawful for him to possess or discharge a firearm, he carried it with
him out of a perceived need for protection. that should be considered when
assessing his moral culpability.
mr.
embry provided five cases to consider and submitted that an appropriate
sentence should fall at the lower end of the accepted range for this offence. mr.
aden has expressed remorse and has received support from his family. he is
still a relatively young man, and his rehabilitation remains an important
sentencing goal.
aggravating and mitigating factors
i find the following aggravating factors have been proven
beyond a reasonable doubt:
•
mr. aden discharged a
loaded, prohibited firearm in a public place where members of the public were
present and could reasonably be expected to be present;
•
the firearm was
modified to allow it to fire in a fully automatic fashion;
•
it had an overcapacity
magazine;
•
mr. suwareh suffered life-threatening
injuries;
•
mr. suwareh was
unarmed and defenceless;
•
mr. aden has a prior
criminal record for both crimes of violence and firearms-related offences;
•
two weapons
prohibition orders bound him; and
•
he possessed a quantity
of crack cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.
several mitigating factors must also be considered:
•
mr. aden entered a guilty plea after one day of the preliminary
hearing;
•
mr. suwareh did not wish to testify and was an uncooperative
witness, which may have presented some difficulty for the crown at the
preliminary hearing and trial;
•
mr. aden has expressed remorse for the harm he caused to mr.
suwareh;
•
he has the love and support of his mother, siblings, partner and
close friends; and
•
social-context evidence explains how systemic racism and
disadvantage impacted him while growing up in regent park.
sentencing law
1)
general
principles and firearms related offences
sentencing
“is a highly individualized process” requiring “a delicate balancing of the
various sentencing principles and objectives”:
r. v. suter
,
2018
scc 34
,
at para.
4
. those principles include general and specific deterrence,
denunciation, and the need to separate offenders from society where appropriate.
they also include rehabilitation and, in some circumstances, restraint.
the
fundamental principle of sentencing, as required by
criminal code
section
718.1, is that a sentence must be “proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender.” sentencing must follow an
individualized process, which requires the sentencing court to consider all
relevant facts, including the “status and life experiences” of the offender:
r.
v. parranto
,
2021 scc 46
, at para.
44
.
in
firearms-related cases, the sentencing principles of general deterrence and
denunciation are given priority. the message must be communicated to the public
that these offences will not be tolerated, and the punishment for committing
them will be severe. the ontario court of appeal has repeatedly denounced
firearms violence and the incalculable toll it has taken on the safety and
security of the citizens of toronto.
in
r. v. danvers
,
(2005),
2005
canlii 30044 (on ca)
,
199 c.c.c. (3d) 490 (ont.
c.a.)
, at para.
77
, the ontario court of
appeal wrote:
death by firearms in public
places in toronto plague this city and must be deterred, denounced and stopped.
only the imposition of exemplary sentences will serve to deter criminals from
arming themselves with handguns ... society must be protected from criminals
armed with deadly weapons.
in
r. v. brown
,
2010 onca 745
, the ontario court of appeal held at para.
14:
handguns are an all too
prevalent menace in the greater toronto area. first and foremost, the
sentences imposed for firearms offences must further the sentencing goals of
denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public.
in
r. v. small
,
2023 onsc 6841
, justice schreck of the superior court of
justice noted that “exemplary sentences” are required given “the prevalence of
gun crime in toronto is depressingly familiar to those who work in the criminal
justice system”: see para. 29.  the court described the true evil of handguns
in particular:
handguns have but one purpose,
which is to kill or seriously injure human beings. they allow those who possess
them to terminate the existence of another person on a whim and in a matter of
seconds, permanently erasing that person’s hopes and dreams and leaving his or
her family and friends to suffer a lifetime of sorrow and heartbreak. that some
people view these tools of death as beneficial devices which one should have a
right to possess is difficult to comprehend.
similarly,
justice harris wrote in
r. v. kawal
,
2018 onsc 7531
, at
para.
11
:
handguns are a social evil. the
supreme court has said and there can be no possible argument against it,
"gun-related crime poses grave danger to canadians."
r. v. nur
2015
scc 15
, per chief justice mclachlin, at para. i, see also justice moldaver in
dissent, at para. 131 and justice watt, as he then was, in
r. v. gayle
,
o.j. no. 3020 (s.c.)
, at
para. 28
. the primary purpose of handguns is to maim and to kill.
lawyers and judges see first-hand the destruction wrought by handguns. they are
a disease, a plague on our communities. we have the means at our disposal to
eradicate or at least to drastically curtail them. it is difficult to
understand why our society would not do everything in its power to ensure that
handguns are not available for criminal purposes.
mr.
aden pleaded guilty to one count of the unlawful possession of a loaded
prohibited firearm, contrary to
criminal code
section 95. he also
pleaded guilty to possessing that firearm in violation of a prior
criminal
code
section 109 weapons prohibition order imposed for a prior
firearms-related offence. recidivists who violate weapons prohibition orders by
possessing illegal firearms, whether or not they commit further firearms-related
crimes of violence, can sometimes expect sentences as high as eight or nine
years: see
r. v. morris
,
2023 onca 816
, at
para.
87
.
a
sentence for violating a weapons prohibition order must generally be served
consecutively. in
r. v. claros
,
2019 onca 626
, the
ontario court of appeal explained the rationale for this requirement at para.
51
:
the principle that such offences should be served consecutively
is intended to ensure that disregard of firearm prohibition orders imposed in
the interest of public safety does not go unpunished. this principle also
recognizes that the breach of a prohibition order is different behaviour than
the associated offences, engaging different social interests…
the maximum sentence for the offence of
discharging a firearm
with intent is 14 years. a
mandatory minimum sentence of five years is required when a restricted or
prohibited firearm is used:
criminal code
section 244(2)(a)(i).
the
ontario court of appeal established a range of sentencing for dangerous
firearms-related offences in
r. v. bellissimo,
2009 onca 49
, of 7 to 11
years. in that case, the offender entered a restaurant with a .40 calibre
handgun. he discharged several rounds of ammunition, striking the owner in the
back and a bystander who suffered a minor injury. a third person was narrowly
missed. the court of appeal wrote the following at paras. 4-5:
we see virtually no mitigating
factors. the seriousness of these crimes is hard to overstate. the respondent
fired several shots in the restaurant. one significantly injured a victim,
another caused a minor injury to a victim, and a third narrowly missed killing
a third victim.
general deterrence and
denunciation must be given a paramount weight in sentencing for these kind of
dangerous gun related charges. we think the sentence fails to give adequate
weight to these factors. we think a proper sentence is ten years…
a
review of the existing authorities demonstrates sentences for similar offences
may deviate from this established range, running from as low as five to six
years and, in some cases, as high as 12 years or more. in support of his
position, mr. embry directed me to several cases where sentences of seven years
or less have been imposed with certain mitigating factors.
in
r. v. greene,
2024 onsc 5155
, justice schreck sentenced an 18 year old
offender to seven years for his role in a violent home invasion robbery. he and
a co-accused carried firearms. during the robbery, the co-accused shot two
victims, causing serious injuries. a third victim suffered psychological
trauma. greene did not have a prior adult criminal record but did have a prior
youth record for firearms offences and was subject to a
ycja
s. 51(1)
order prohibiting him from possessing firearms. social context evidence
demonstrated he grew up in poverty and was exposed to violence and crime as a child.
in coming to his conclusion, justice schreck placed great emphasis that the
offender was “barely an adult” when he took part in the crimes: see paras. 52
and 64.
in
r. v. baugh, liburd and reece,
2021 onsc 8408
, the three offenders shot
at multiple victims who were in a taxi. the driver of the taxi was struck once,
but made a recovery from his injuries. liburd was the offender most closely
aligned with mr. aden’s circumstances. liburd was 28 at the time, with a prior
criminal record, and subject to a 109 prohibition order and a bail order at the
time of the shooting. he pleaded guilty to the intentional discharge of a
firearm and aggravated assault, and was sentenced by justice forestell to 7.5
years.
in
r. v. larmond,
2011 onsc 7170
, the offender was found guilty after a
trial for shooting a man in the abdomen. the offender was associated with a
known drug dealer who believed the victim owed him $200, but the motive for the
shooting was somewhat unclear and did not involve any planning. justice
belobaba described the shooting as “unprovoked and irrational”: see para. 9.
the offender had no prior criminal record. the court imposed a seven-year
sentence.
in
r. v. reis,
2017 onsc 1961
, two young persons taunted the offender. one
of them had pointed a gun at him in the past. when that same young person
threatened him with a firearm a second time, he chased after him, tackled him
and took the firearm. reis then shot the firearm five times and struck the
young person once, hitting him in the lower abdomen. reis has no prior criminal
record. justice akhtar accepted the crown’s position of six years, although
noted it was “not so low as to be unfit”: see para. 35.
at
the very low end of the range, mr. embry directed me to
r. v. johnson,
2020
oncj 272
. the offender was 26 years old and a friend of the victim. one night,
following an argument, he reached for a firearm and shot the victim once in the
chest. the victim did not require surgery to recover. despite a prior criminal
record (although not including any entries for firearms-related offences), the
court imposed a sentence of five and a half years.
in
other reported decisions, much higher sentences have been imposed. in
r.
v. jefferson
,
2014 onca 434
, the appellant walked out onto a roadway,
stopped in front of a vehicle, and fired a single shot from a handgun through
the car window at the victim, who was a passenger. there was a history of
animosity between the parties. the bullet struck the victim in the arm.  the
trial judge sentenced the accused to 10 years. the court of appeal upheld the
sentence, noting it was within the range established in
bellisimo.
in
r. v. weeden,
2019 onsc 773
, the offender attended a bar in downtown
toronto. following a dispute with other patrons, he retrieved a gun and fired a
single shot outside the bar where everyone had assembled. the bullet struck an
uber driver who was waiting nearby in his car, peacefully minding his own
business. weeden was convicted of various offences, including discharging a
firearm with intent and aggravated assault. he was subject to a weapons
prohibition order at the time.
justice
mcarthur noted that the offender had time to deliberate upon his actions and intentionally
shot the gun toward a large group of people, any one of whom could have been
killed. the shooting occurred in a public place where bystanders were put at
severe risk. he imposed a sentence of 9.5 years on the charges of aggravated
assault and discharge with intent: see paras. 29-34 and 46.
in
r. v. stephens
,
2024 onsc 35
, the offender
was found guilty of two counts of aggravated assault following a shooting in
st. catherine’s. he was part of a group of associates that confronted another
group. members of the offender’s group fired shots at the other group, striking
a member of that group, mr. savalanpour, twice in the lower abdomen. five
innocent bystanders were also hit.
justice
goodman sentenced the offender as a party to the offences, as the evidence did
not establish he fired the shots himself. nevertheless, he was a party to a
plan to shoot mr. savalanpour in a public place, knowing that other people would
be put at risk. he imposed a sentence of 9 years. he held that the offender’s
conduct demonstrated “patent dangerousness” and reflected “extremely high”
moral culpability given the degree of planning that went into the shooting: see
para. 61.
the
very upper end of the sentencing range for offences of this nature includes
some of the decisions provided to me by mr. pyper, such as
r. v. cox,
2015
onca 769
,
r. v. hakimi,
2019 onca 749
,
r. v. sauve,
2019 onsc 960
and
r. v. hylton,
2016 onca 991
.
in
hakimi
, a 12-year sentence was upheld by the court of appeal. following
a confrontation with the victim inside an after-hours restaurant, the appellant
fired a gun twice into the ceiling. when the victim exited the restaurant, the
appellant shot him in the stomach and hand. he has a prior criminal record
which included convictions for breaching court orders.
in
sauve
,
the offender was found guilty after trial of discharging a firearm,
aggravated assault, use of a firearm while committing an indictable offence, occupying
a motor vehicle with knowledge a firearm was present, possession of a loaded
firearm without authorization, possession of a firearm without a licence,
carrying a concealed weapon, dangerous operation of a vehicle, failure to stop,
and breach of probation. he and another male person arrived at a townhouse
complex, fired 13 projectiles into the living room window of that residence,
and then fled. a ten-year-old child was shot but survived. his siblings and
parents were also home at the time. the intended target of the shooting was
another man known to frequent the same townhouse complex.
the
offender was 20 at the time of the incident. he had a criminal record for
crimes of violence. he was on parole and probation. justice byrne imposed a
global 12.5 year sentence: see para. 41.
in
cox
,
the appellant was convicted of robbery and firearms-related
charges, including discharging a firearm with intent. he and another suspect robbed
the victim in a fido store in a busy shopping mall. the appellant shot the
victim in the leg using a handgun. the victim’s 11-year-old sister was present
at the time.
despite
the appellant’s status as a youthful first-time offender, the trial judge
imposed a sentence of 11 years. he was on probation (from a prior discharge)
and a bail order at the time of the shooting.
his
status as a first offender was “far outweighed by the fact that he fired the
gun in a crowded public place causing life-threatening injuries to the victim,
all in furtherance of some petty or criminal grievance”: see para.
13
. the court of appeal upheld the sentence.
in
hylton
,
the appellant “
was deeply and
completely involved in the preparation and execution of the home invasion”: see
para.
1
. he was a first-time offender. the
trial judge imposed a global sentence of 10 years for two counts of robbery and
one count each of unlawful confinement, discharging a firearm with intent to
wound, aggravated assault, possession of a loaded prohibited firearm, and
wearing a face mask with intent to commit an indictable offence.
he developed a plan to break into a drug dealer’s home and
commit a robbery. he enlisted several co-accused. while disguised and armed
with firearms, they broke into the home and demanded cash and drugs. they
threatened the victim’s mother. when the victim would not provide drugs, the
offender told a co-accused to shoot him. the victim fought back, and one of the
co-accused discharged a firearm, striking the victim in the leg. he had serious
injuries as a result.
the
appellant was 27 but had “unclear” rehabilitative prospects: see
mills, hylton and dennis
,
2014
onsc 1134
, at para.
91
. he had two young children that he
supported. he expressed remorse and took programs while in custody: see
para.
139
. the court of appeal upheld a 10-year sentence.
finally, in another recent decision, a first-time offender also received
an 11-year sentence for a dangerous shooting. in
r. v. george
,
2023 oncj 298
, the offender attended a birthday party for his
one-year-old child. he possessed a loaded firearm. just before 8:00 p.m.,
gunfire erupted at the birthday party. four men discharged a total of
twenty-four rounds of ammunition. one combatant and two children were seriously
injured. justice fraser found the offender fired six rounds at another man and
in the direction of “a sea of children” other guests: see paras.
1-2
.
justice
fraser was unable to conclude that the offender personally fired the shots that
injured the victims. regardless, he remained morally culpable for his actions
and contribution to the gunfight. he showed no remorse and remained a danger to
the community. despite mr. george not having a prior criminal record, a
sentence of 11 years was imposed: see para. 66.
2)
firearms
violence in canada
in
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
, the supreme court of canada held that t
he “frequency of a type of offence in a particular region
can certainly be a relevant factor for a sentencing judge”: see para.
89
.
in
george
,
justice fraser of this courthouse noted
that there had been a “dangerous increase in recent years” regarding firearms
violence in toronto: see para.
8
.
sadly, based on my observations of the
cases regularly appearing in this courthouse, i agree with my colleague. while
the problem of firearms violence is a multi-faceted one, courts must take
appropriate steps to respond to a persistent community threat accordingly.
3)
rehabilitation
and restraint
rehabilitation
and restraint must be considered even in cases of serious firearms-related
violence: see
r. v. desir
,
2021 onca 486
, at paras.
41-42
.
mr. aden has rehabilitative potential, which must
be given some weight. however, he is not a first-time offender. he has been convicted
of a crime of violence in the past, as well as firearms-related offences. he was
given the opportunity to rehabilitate and reform himself. instead, he chose to
re-offend with a firearm. he also carried crack cocaine for the purpose of
trafficking, and the toxic combination of firearms and drugs is well-documented
in our jurisprudence.
mr.
aden was a mature man, 30 years old at the time he shot mr. suwareh. he had
been sentenced to the penitentiary previously for the illegal possession of a
firearm. the principle of restraint has little, if any, application to this
case.
i
recognize mr. aden has strong family and community-based support. his mother
cares deeply for him and remains a source of love and guidance. his close friends,
interviewed for the epsr, speak of his other good character and desire to help
others. mr. kogulan srivaratharajah (aka “kogi”), said he was like a brother to
him. he can assist mr. aden with securing employment upon his release from
custody. ms. tesfamariyam believes in his ability to change and will offer her
support in the future to help him stay “on the right track.”
mr.
aden has demonstrated he can succeed with education when he commits to seeing
programs through. that speaks well for long-term success if he is provided with the
opportunity to access further educational programming while in custody.
4)
mitigating
effect of a guilty plea
mr.
aden pleaded guilty. the crown’s primary witness, mr. suwareh, was reluctant to
testify at the preliminary hearing. mr. aden spared the justice system from the
need to conclude that proceeding and a potentially lengthy trial in the
superior court of justice.
nevertheless,
the case against him was very strong. he was arrested immediately after the
shooting. the victim was located on the street with life-threatening gunshot
injuries. the firearm was recovered. the incident happened in broad daylight
with witnesses. a particle of gunshot residue was situated on his hands. the
plea only occurred after the preliminary hearing commenced, and mr. suwareh was
located on the strength of a material witness warrant.
the
weight to be assigned to the mitigating effect of a guilty plea is not set in
stone. in some cases, it may be less important than others: see
r. v.
lynch,
2022 onca 109
, at para.
20
. i find this to be a case of medium
weight. furthermore, as i will discuss later in this judgment, mr. aden does
not fully accept responsibility for his actions.
however,
prior to entering his guilty pleas, a discussion took place between the
originally assigned assistant crown attorney (“aca”) to this matter (not mr.
pyper), myself as the judge assigned to hear the preliminary hearing, and mr.
embry. during those discussions, the aca indicated the crown would not seek a sentence
of more than ten years. by the time of the sentencing hearing, it was somewhat
unclear if this position was a hard ceiling or meant to convey a general
position only.
mr.
pyper, honourably and in the greatest traditions of his office, indicated that
he would not seek a sentence of more than ten years if i were to conclude that
mr. aden’s decision to plead guilty was influenced by how this information was
communicated to him. i accept mr. embry’s submission that this was a factor in
his client’s decision to plead guilty. i will, therefore, approach my decision
with this factor in mind.
5)
difficult
conditions of pre-sentence custody
mr.
aden has been held at the toronto east detention centre (“tedc”) since january
2024. however, for 15 months after his arrest, he was held at the toronto south
detention centre (“tsdc”.)
mr.
aden has experienced triple bunking regularly. he has little privacy in his
cell. only two operating phones are on his range, and one shower is in
disrepair. poor ventilation at the jail is affecting his breathing. he
requested a medical check-up but has yet to be seen by a doctor. he has had to
barter with his other inmates for sleep medication to treat his anxiety.
mr.
embry filed records from the tedc, demonstrating that from january 4 to
december 3, 2024, mr. aden was in a cell with two other inmates for 199 nights.
cells are not designed for three inmates. he had to sleep on a mattress on the
floor 27 of those days. he could access a yard for fresh air or exercise only
35% of the time.
according
to mr. aden, as bad as the conditions are at the tedc, they are an improvement
from what he experienced at the tsdc. from october 12, 2022 – january 4, 2024,
mr. aden was housed at the tsdc. lockdown records from that institution demonstrate
he was regularly subject to partial or full lockdowns.
difficult
conditions of imprisonment should be considered a significant collateral
consequence justifying some mitigation at sentencing: see
r. v. morgan
,
2020 onca 279
,
at paras.
8-9
;
r. v. reddick
,
2020 onca 786
,
at para.
11
. despite these
difficult conditions, mr. aden has not been charged with any misconduct while
in custody.
in
r.
v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344
,
at para.
52
, the ontario court of
appeal held that
duncan
credit
is “not a deduction from the otherwise appropriate sentence, but is one of the
factors to be considered in determining the appropriate sentence”. however,
because it is a mitigating factor to be considered, “it cannot justify the
imposition of a sentence that is inappropriate.” the court of appeal cautioned
against the “quantification” of this factor, as such an approach
“may skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence”: see
para.
53
.
6)
proportionality
and
morris
considerations
mr. aden is a black man.
in
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
, the court of appeal held that “[e]vidence that an
offender's choices were limited or influenced by his disadvantaged
circumstances, however, speaks to the offender's moral responsibility for his
acts,” although “not to the seriousness of the crimes”: see para.
76
.
while there is no need for an accused to draw a
direct causal link between his life experiences and the offences, there must be
some connection between the fact of systemic racism and “the circumstances or
events that are said to explain or mitigate the criminal conduct in
issue”: see para.
42
;
r. v. s.m
.,
2023
onca 417
, at para.
27
.
the epsr places great emphasis on mr. aden’s early life
in regent park, where a defining feature of the neighbourhood was poverty, a
lack of opportunities, and the prevalence of criminal activity, including gun
violence. having been exposed to this activity regularly at a young age and
seeing the toll of its associated violence, the author wrote that one could
“develop an understanding of [mr. aden’s] circumstances that lead to his
involvement in the offence” and “the effect of community violence on him should
not be minimized”: see p. 13. his decision to arm himself can be better
understood as arising out of fear for his safety.
in
r. v. husbands
,
2024 onca 155
, at paras.
59-60
, the ontario court of
appeal provided helpful guidance for assessing social-context evidence and
determining the weight a sentencing court should attach to it in cases of
serious firearms-related violence. the court emphasized its conclusion in
morris
that while this evidence may be relevant to assessing the offender’s degree of
moral culpability, it does not alter the seriousness of the offence:
morris
also makes clear that
social context evidence is not relevant when calibrating the seriousness of the
offence. indeed,
morris
comments that the carrying of a loaded,
concealed firearm in a public place was “made no less serious, dangerous, and
harmful to the community” as a result of social context evidence: para. 76.
accordingly, even where there is relevant social context evidence before the
court, deterrence and denunciation still play a predominant role in sentencing
for serious crimes, including crimes involving the unlawful possession of
loaded handguns in public places.
of course, that is not to say
that social context evidence becomes irrelevant in cases such as these.
nonetheless, depending upon the seriousness of the offence, that seriousness
can weigh more heavily in the sentencing calculus than any mitigation of the
offender’s moral blameworthiness…
i
do not find that the social-context evidence presented in this case significantly
diminishes mr. aden’s moral culpability for these offences. in
morris,
the
appellant possessed a firearm, in part, due to his fear of others, including
the police. that fear was explained, to some extent, by his experiences with
systemic racism. even considering his genuine fear, it was a “limited
mitigating factor”: see para. 101. he put “members of the community, and police
officers engaged in the lawful execution of their duties, at real risk.”
notably, mr.
morris was not convicted of shooting a defenceless victim, as mr. aden has
been. additionally, mr. aden’s version of the shooting that he relayed to the
author of the epsr is not consistent with the agreed facts for the plea.  mr.
aden asserted that he held the firearm for protection, yet he was also in
possession of crack cocaine for the purpose of trafficking that day. his
reasons for possessing the firearm were, at a minimum, not merely “for
protection,” and i do not accept his explanation. drug traffickers typically
possess firearms as a tool of their illegal trade. more concerning is that mr.
aden said that he saw mr. suwareh with what appeared to be a firearm, too, thus
allegedly explaining his decision to shoot first. but mr. suwareh was
located moments after the shooting by nurse wellman, and no firearm was present
on his person. furthermore, mr. aden abandoned any defences, including
self-defence, by pleading guilty.
i recognize that any ambiguities in an agreed statement of fact must
be resolved in favour of the accused: see
r. v. morgan
,
2024 abca 345
, at para.
43
. i find
no ambiguity. nor must i accept mr. aden’s version of events, and i note a
mitigating factor must be proven on a balance of probabilities through evidence
accepted by the court: see
criminal code
section 724(3)(b);
r. v. nguyen
,
2012 onca 534
;
r. v. kunicki
,
2014
mbca 22
, at paras.
24-26
;
r. v.
pahl
,
2016 bcca 234
, at paras.
53-78
.
mr. aden’s
decision to arm himself and shoot mr. suwareh three times in a public setting
reflects a startling degree of moral culpability and indifference to human
life. he did not have to engage in this hideous conduct; he chose to. he did so
knowing the risk that his victim would die or that anyone nearby might be inadvertently
exposed to harm themselves or at least bear witness to his callous actions. furthermore,
he created a risk of escalating violence and grave psychological harm to bystanders:
see
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
, at para.
18
.
that is not to
say his life experiences are irrelevant to my decision. understanding what an
accused person has been through and how those experiences have affected them is
always important information for a sentencing court. mr. aden experienced
hardships in his teenage years, mistreatment by the authorities and exposure to
firearms-related violence. i accept each of these had an impact on him. however,
mr. aden is not a youthful offender before the courts for the first time for a
firearms-related offence. he has had many years to reform himself. nor does his
background change the fundamental nature of what happened in this case, which
was a potentially lethal act of intentional violence.
analysis and conclusion
mr. aden’s
moral culpability for these offences is extremely high, even in the context of
his lived experiences. he chose to deal cocaine and arm himself. he chose to shoot
mr. suwareh near a public park in the late afternoon in downtown toronto. the
gunshots were fired with the intent of causing serious injury to his victim and
with total disregard for not only his life but the lives and safety of everyone
nearby.
but for the rapid intervention of pc gholamali
and nurse wellman, this could have easily been another firearms-based death.
their decisiveness likely saved mr. suwareh’s life and resulted in mr aden's
immediate apprehension. the police investigation that followed located the
firearm before further tragedy could result.
the nature of this particular firearm demands further comment. all
handguns are instruments of death. but this firearm was equipped with an over-capacity
magazine and was modified to allow it to fire fully automatically. the
potential for untold horror was manifest. this is a serious aggravating factor.
furthermore, mr. aden not only wielded this weapon to commit a terrifying act
of intentional violence, but he did so while bound by two prior weapons prohibition
orders. this was also his second set of convictions for firearms-related
offences involving a prohibited or restricted firearm.
the residents of this city continue to experience a staggering
degree of gun violence. it is easy to become numb to the constant headlines,
but we must never become desensitized to firearm crime. the devastation
associated with it must always be seen as shocking, and the courts’ response to
it appropriately severe. firearms-based crimes that are committed in public
where anyone could be harmed not only take a toll on their immediate victims. they
inflict permanent ruin on our collective sense of safety and security. each
shooting leaves the community a little more psychologically scarred. the
impact of these crimes is acknowledged to be widespread and severe: see
husbands
at para.
126
.
as noted by justice goodman in
stephens
at para.
33
:
despite repeated attempts to
convey society's repudiation of firearms offences, possession and use of
illicit firearms continues to be a pervasion problem in ontario, requiring
ongoing denunciation. when firearms are utilized in public, their impact can be
traumatizing to victims and witnesses alike.
mr. aden has
expressed remorse for his actions and shown insight into the terrible harm he
caused mr. suwareh. that is to his credit.
nevertheless,
mr. aden committed an extraordinarily dangerous offence and violated two
existing 109 prohibition orders. the need to protect the public must be given
priority. the crimes took a terrible toll not only on mr. suwareh but also on
his father, and the impact offences have on their victims must be considered at
sentencing:
criminal code
section 718.2(iii.1).
in the cases
provided by mr. embry, the offenders lacked many of the aggravating factors
present in this case. for example, in
reis
, johnston and larmond,
the
offenders had no prior criminal record and were not subject to a prior weapons
prohibition order. in
baugh
, liburd, and reece,
while one of the
offenders (liburd) did have a prior criminal record and was subject to a
section 109
order, the victim was shot only once despite multiple shots being
fired, and there was little to no victim impact information. in
greene
,
the
offender was only 18 years old and did not personally fire any of the shots
that wounded the victims.
even noting the
lack of any planning behind the shooting, a sentence of 11 years, as proposed
by the crown, could have been entirely justified. indeed, an even greater
sentence might have been warranted, given the relentless menace of gun violence
afflicting this city. succinctly put, “gun violence is a scourge in our society
and gun crimes must be treated with the utmost seriousness”: see
r. v. akram
,
2024 onca 892
, at para.
8
. however, given the position taken by the original aca,
which was relayed to mr. embry, i will reduce the global sentence to 10 years.
on the charges of discharging a firearm and aggravated
assault, i impose a sentence of nine years custody concurrent. on the count of possession
of a loaded restricted or prohibited firearm, i impose a concurrent sentence of
six years in prison. on the count of possession of a firearm contrary to a
prohibition order, i impose a sentence of one year in custody, consecutive.
mr. aden is
entitled to credit for 1, 229 days of pre-sentence custody (819 real days x
1.5, as per
summers
). therefore, the sentence from today’s date is 2, 421
days (or 6 years and nearly 8 months).
this sentence respects the totality principle:
see
r.
v. ahmed
,
2017 onca 76
, at paras.
79-85
.
aggravated assault and discharge of a firearm with intent
are primary designated offences under
criminal code
section
487.051(1)
. a dna order is
mandatory.  pursuant to
s. 487.051(3)
(b) of the
criminal code
, i am satisfied that
it is in the best interests of justice to make an order authorizing the taking
of a dna sample for the other secondary designated offences.
a weapons prohibition under
criminal code
section
109 will be imposed for life.
there will be a
forfeiture and destruction order concerning the seized firearm and ammunition
pursuant to
criminal code
section 491(1).
the victim fine
surcharges are waived. mr. aden will be in custody, and it will cause undue
hardship to pay them.
i make an order under s. 743.21 of the
code
,
directing mr. aden to have no contact with mr. suwareh or any member of his
immediate family.
released: january 6, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
justice rutherford granted credit for approximately three months of
pre-sentence custody and two months for strict house-arrest bail conditions.
i wish to emphasize that everyone involved in this
case as crown or defence counsel have demonstrated exceptional work and
diligence throughout these proceedings.
the
criminal code
defines a victim as “
a
person who has suffered physical or emotional harm, property damage or economic
loss as the result of the commission of an offence against any other person.” the
canadian victims’ bill of rights
defines “victim” as “
an
individual who has suffered physical or emotional harm, property damage or
economic loss as the result of the commission or alleged commission of an
offence.”
10 x 365 = 3, 650 total days, less
summers
credit of 1, 229 days.