ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. balasooriyan
, 2025 oncj 68
date:
february 6, 2025
court
file no.:24-81300072
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
baskaran balasooriyan
publication
ban
s.
486.5(1)
before
justice angela l. mcleod
sentencing
hearing january 27, 2025
miriam villamil-pallister....................................................... counsel
for the crown
jeffrey fisher.......................................................................
counsel for the defendant
mcleod j.:
overview
mr. balasooriyan was convicted at trial of:
(1)
possession of stolen property exceeding $5000 (a
vehicle);
(2)
attempted abduction of a.k-m. (a person under
the age of 14 years);
(3)
mischief by interrupting or interfering with the
lawful use, enjoyment of property (a public park);
(4)
criminal harassment of a.k-m.
on the day of the sentencing hearing, he entered
a guilty plea to one count of breaching his release order.
the parties do not agree on the following:
(1)
the appropriate length of the custodial
sentence;
(2)
whether or not the sentence should be served in
the community pursuant to a conditional sentence order;
(3)
which count should be stayed pursuant to
r.
v. kienapple
(
1974 canlii 14 (scc)
, 1 s.c.r. 729);
(4)
whether or not this court has the jurisdiction
to make an order under
s. 161
of the
criminal code
;
(5)
length and terms of a probation order.
review of the facts
this court found that mr. balasooriyan brazenly
stole a car from a repair shop mid-day while the shop was open and operating on
september 11, 2023.
the value of the vehicle was at least $5000, and
in the specific range of $6000-$9000.
when, ultimately, mr. balasooriyan was arrested
on september 13, 2023, police located cannabis in the vehicle, and i find that
those drugs belonged to him.  additionally, on his person police located a
pocketknife and other assorted and sundry items.
a.k-m. was 12 years old at the time of the
attempted abduction, september 13, 2023.  she was at a public park in her
neighbourhood, with friends near a splash pad.   mr. balasooriyan initiated a
conversation with her that lasted some time.  i find that the conversation was
pointed and an attempt to ingratiate himself and to encourage her to trust him.
he spoke of being a soccer coach, and that he had a 13 year old daughter among
other things.  the conversation stopped and re-started.
mr. balasooriyan attempted, repeatedly, to get
a.k-m. to come with him to his car, enticing her with the prospect of listening
to music.   she refused and he sped off in his car blasting music.  she was
very scared, and her friends were scared.  she called the police.  she
testified that she “knew straight away that, uh, something was obviously going
to happen in  the car because i’ve heard of those stories, and i’ve had dreams
about them.  so, i immediately got like the ick”.
in his actions of attempting to abduct a.k-m.,
mr. balasooriyan interfered or interrupted her lawful enjoyment of the public
park.
in his actions of speaking to a.k-m. in
segments, after she had walked away and after he had left her immediate area,
he caused her to fear for her safety.
mr. balasooriyan was on release at the time of
the offences for domestic assault.  indeed, a copy of his release order was
located within the stolen vehicle.
mr. balasooriyan has a criminal record which
includes 20 convictions dating from 2003-2012.  convictions have been
registered for offences against the administration of justice, driving
offences, property offences et al. he has received custodial sentences and a
conditional sentence order as well as fines and probation.
mr. balasooriyan was in custody during the
trial, and then released post conviction on a judicial interim release order on
consent of the crown.  he amassed 375 presentence custody days, which i enhanced
to 563 days as of the date of the sentencing hearing, and to 575 days as of the
date of the imposition of sentence today.
position of the parties
the defence submits that a conditional sentence
order is appropriate, suggesting that the principles of sentencing can be met
by imposing 105 days for the attempted abduction, 60 days concurrent for the
criminal harassment, 45 days consecutive for the possession over and 29 days
consecutive for the breach of release order. the defence seeks a stay of the
mischief count. the total sought is 179 days, to ensure that mr. balasooriyan
does not face any immigration issues.
the crown submits that a conditional sentence
order is inappropriate, suggesting that the principles of sentencing can only be
met by imposing 420 days for the attempted abduction, 90 days concurrent for the
criminal harassment, 30 days concurrent for the mischief and 60 days
consecutive for the possession of stolen property.  the crown argues that none
of the counts should be stayed.  the total sought is 480 days, and the crown
argues that reducing the sentence to 179 days to avoid immigration issues would
make the sentence demonstrably unfit.
both parties agree that the sentence should be
reduced by the presentence custody served. both parties agree that probation is
required but disagree as to the length and terms. both parties agree that a dna
order is required.  both parties agree that a s. 109 order is mandatory.
the crown seeks a
s.161
order, the defence
argues that is not available.
which count, if any, should be stayed pursuant
to
kienapple
?
the rule against multiple convictions, or the
kienapple
principle (
supra
) “proposes that an individual should not be
subjected to more than one conviction arising out of the same ‘cause or matter’
or the same ‘delict’, consisting of a single criminal act committed in
circumstances where the offences alleged are comprised of the same or
substantially the same facts and elements”.  it is the logical application of
res
judicata.
to apply, there must be
both
a
sufficiently close factual nexus
and
a sufficiently close legal nexus between the
two offences in the circumstances.
r. v. aharonov
(2015),
o.j. no. 7151
,
2015 oncj 787
(ont. c.j.)
at para.
14
.
whether there is a sufficient factual nexus turns on
whether both offences were committed on the basis of a single set of underlying
facts. the court must be satisfied that the same act of the accused grounds
each of the charges. (
aharonov
, supra
, para.
15
.)
the
kienapple
principle provides that
where the physical acts related to one count are identical to those that
pertain to a second charge, the rule against multiple convictions is engaged
and a stay of proceedings is entered.
r. v. c. (m.)
(2012),
o.j. no. 1797
,
2012 carswellont 4918
,
2012 onsc 2505
(ont. s.c.j.)
at para.
21
i find that the repeated communication with
a.k-m. underlying the criminal harassment was one in the same that underlies
the actus reus of the mischief.  the criminal harassment was in essence the
actus reus of the attempted abduction. there is both a factual and a legal
nexus between the attempted abduction and both the mischief and the criminal
harassment.
a stay will be granted with respect to each of those counts
.
does s. 161 apply to any of the convictions
section 161
of the
criminal code
falls
under
part v, sexual offences, public morals and disorderly conduct
.  it
reads:
161(1) order
of prohibition
when an
offender is convicted, or is discharged on the conditions prescribed in a
probation order under section 730, of an offence referred to in subsection
(1.1) in respect of a person who is under the age of 16 years, the court that
sentences the offender or directs that the accused be discharged, as the case
may be, in addition to any other punishment that may be imposed for that
offence or any other condition prescribed in the order of discharge, shall
consider making and may make, subject to the conditions or exemptions that the
court directs, an order prohibiting the offender from
(a)
attending a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of
16 years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare
centre, schoolground, playground or community centre;
(a.1)
being within two kilometres, or any other distance specified in the order, of
any dwelling-house where the victim identified in the order ordinarily resides
or of any other place specified in the order;
(b)
seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment
is remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16
years;
(c)
having any contact — including communicating by any means — with a person who
is under the age of 16 years, unless the offender does so under the supervision
of a person whom the court considers appropriate; or
(d)
using the internet or other digital network, unless the offender does so in
accordance with conditions set by the court.
161(1.1)
offences
the offences
for the purpose of subsection (1) are
(a) an offence under section 151, 152 or 155,
subsection 160(2) or (3), section 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172.1 or 172.2,
subsection 173(2), section 271, 272, 273 or 279.011, subsection 279.02(2) or
279.03(2),
section 280 or 281
or subsection 286.1(2), 286.2(2) or
286.3(2);
(b) an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt
to commit rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on
male) or 245 (common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the
criminal code
,
chapter c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read
immediately before january 4, 1983;
(c) an offence under subsection 146(1) (sexual
intercourse with a female under 14) or section 153 (sexual intercourse with
step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent
or guardian procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting defilement) of
the
criminal code
,
chapter c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it
read immediately before january 1, 1988; or
(d) an offence under subsection 212(1) (procuring),
212(2) (living on the avails of prostitution of person under 18 years),
212(2.1) (aggravated offence in relation to living on the avails of
prostitution of person under 18 years) or 212(4) (prostitution of person under
18 years) of this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this paragraph comes into force.
(emphasis
added)
in
r. v. j. (k.r.)
2016 scc 31
,  the
supreme court wrote as follows:
44      the
legislative history, judicial interpretation, and design of s. 161 all confirm
that the section has an overarching protective function: to shield children
from sexual violence.
45
section 161 was enacted in 1993 in response to
the decision in
r. v. heywood
(1992),
1992 canlii 6008 (bc ca)
,
20 b.c.a.c. 166 (b.c. c.a.)
, in which the british columbia court
of appeal struck down under
s. 7 of the charter
the offence of
loitering:
see an act to amend the criminal code and the young offenders
act, s.c. 1993, c. 45, s. 1
. after 1993, s. 161 continued to evolve and, in
2012, the impugned amendments were introduced through the safe streets and
communities act. the protective function of s. 161 generally, and the 2012
amendments specifically, was repeatedly emphasized throughout the legislative
debates. for example, at the bill's third reading, the minister of justice
stated that the proposed amendments are
"an important step forward in
the protection of children in this country"
(house of commons debates,
vol. 145, no. 144, 3rd sess., 40th parl., march 11, 2011, at p. 8967).
(emphasis
added)
46      the
jurisprudence interpreting and applying s. 161 confirms the provision's
protective purpose: see, e.g.,
r. v. heywood
(1992),
1994 canlii 34 (scc)
,
3 s.c.r. 761
(b.c. c.a.)
, at p. 803
;
r. v. a. (r.k.),
2006 abca 82
,
208 c.c.c. (3d)
74 (alta. c.a.)
, at para.
20
;
r. v. perron
,
2009 onca 498
,
244 c.c.c.
(3d) 369 (ont. c.a.)
, at para.
13
.
47
as
well
, the design of
s. 161
is consistent with its purpose of protecting
children from sexual violence.
section 161
orders are discretionary and
"subject to the conditions or exemptions that the court directs" (s.
161(1)). they can therefore be carefully tailored to the circumstances of a particular
offender. the discretionary and flexible nature of
s. 161
demonstrates that it
was designed to empower courts to craft tailored orders to address the nature
and degree of risk that a sexual offender poses to children once released into
the community. failure to comply with the order can lead to a term of
imprisonment of up to four years (s. 161(4)).
48
further,
i agree with the line of cases holding that
s. 161
orders can be imposed only
when there is an evidentiary basis upon which to conclude that the particular
offender poses a risk to children and the judge is satisfied that the specific
terms of the order are a reasonable attempt to minimize the risk
:
see
a.
(r.k.)
, at para.
32
; see also
r. v. b. (r.r.),
2013 bcca 224
,
338
b.c.a.c. 106 (b.c. c.a.)
, at paras.
32-34
. these orders are not available as a
matter of course. in addition, the content of the order must carefully respond
to an offender's specific circumstances.
(emphasis
added)
the offence of abduction, s. 281, is captured as
an enumerated offence under section 161(1.1)(a). the offence does not require a
sexual element.  parliament intended to extend the punishment to more than
sexual offences, distinguishing categories of offences into sections a, b, c
and d.  the punishment is anchored in the protection of children and the
mitigation of risk thereto.  section 281 is specific to the abduction of
someone under the age of 16 years; a child.
herein the defence argues that because mr.
balasooriyan was not successful in his efforts, and thus convicted of an
attempt, the prohibition is not applicable.
the court
in r. v. belbin
,
2015 onsc
1714
, found that:
107      mr. belbin's behaviour and
the absence of any explanation for it raise concerns about the risk he presents
to children in general. i therefore make an order under
s. 161
of the
criminal
code
prohibiting him from:
(a) attending a public park or public
swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can
reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, schoolground,
playground or community centre;
(b) seeking, obtaining or continuing
any employment, whether or not the employment is remunerated, or becoming or
being a volunteer in a capacity, that involves being in a position of trust or
authority towards persons under the age of 16 years; and
(c) having any contact — including
communicating by any means — with a person who is under the age of 16 years,
unless he does so under the supervision of a person whom the court considers
appropriate.
section 161 applies to the attempted abduction
conviction.   the goal of the section is to protect children from the risk of
harm.   i find that there is an evidentiary basis upon which to conclude that
mr. balasooriyan poses a risk to children and that the specific terms of the
order are a reasonable attempt to minimize that risk.   he was utilizing a
stolen vehicle, and attempting to lure a 12 year old girl into that vehicle in
order to abduct her.  whether or not he successfully achieved his goal is not
relevant to the consideration of whether or not he poses a risk to children.
attempted offences are referenced in s. 161(1.1)(b).
moreover, as in
belbin
, supra
, the
absence of any explanation mr. balasooriyan’s actions and behaviour raise
concerns about the risk he presents to children in general.
mr. balasooriyan’s personal circumstances
mr. balasooriyan did not request a presentence
report nor other reports or assessments.
his counsel advised that:
(1)
he came to canada in 1999 as a refugee.
(2)
he was 21 years old at that time.
(3)
he is a permanent resident of canada.
(4)
the civil war in sri lanka affected him and he
moved numerous times within the country and his family finances were lessened.
(5)
he was married in 2008 and divorced after 14
years.
(6)
he has 2 daughters.  his ex-wife has full
custody of the children.
(7)
he was diagnosed with bipolar personality
disorder 2 years ago.  his sister believes that he also suffers from ptsd.
(8)
he last worked in the summer of 2023.
(9)
recently, post release from custody, he has been
taking his prescribed medication, seeing a psychiatrist, and is surrounded by
family. it should be noted that he was living with his sister, on release for
the alleged domestic assault at the time of these offences.
aggravating and mitigating factors
i find that there are little to no mitigating
factors to be considered.  while mr. balasooriyan has a mental health
diagnosis, there is no evidence to suggest that it was a significant factor in
his behaviour on the day in question.  his mental health diagnosis does not
reduce his moral culpability.
i am mindful of defence counsel’s submission
regarding mr. balasooriyan’s difficult early life, living in a war-torn country
and his need to seek refuge here in canada.  i cannot find that this is a
mitigating factor as there is no evidence upon which this court can conclude
that there is any connection between those difficulties and the offences at
bar.
i find the following to be aggravating factors
for consideration:
(1)
the criminal record, which is lengthy and covers
a spectrum of offences;
(2)
that mr. balasooriyan was on release for an
alleged crime of violence at the time of these offences; furthermore, he
subsequently breached his release while awaiting trial on these offences. he
was on a gps monitoring term of release and left his residence without his
surety.  he lied to the police when arrested. the breach was brazen and gives
rise to concern about risk to the community.
(3)
that mr. balasooriyan was utilizing a stolen
vehicle to affect the abduction attempt; a vehicle that would not be traceable
to him.  the use of the vehicle increased the potential risk as the child could
have been easily and quickly transported away from the jurisdiction.
(4)
that mr. balasooriyan had drugs in the vehicle;
(5)
the impact upon a.k-m. who testified at trial
that she suffers from nightmares since the incident.  the impact upon the other
children who were present at the park and who were frightened by mr.
balasooriyan’s actions.  the impact upon the other members of the community who
were also concerned and who called the police to report his actions.
conditional sentencing
a.
conditional sentences – law and general principles
section
742.1
of the
criminal code
sets out the considerations for
a cso.  in summary, there are four criteria to be met:
a.
the offender must be convicted of an offence that is not punishable
by a minimum term of imprisonment;
b.
the court must impose a term of imprisonment of less than two years;
c.
the safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender
serving the sentence in the community; and,
d.
a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in s
s. 718 to 718.2
.
the
first three criteria establish whether a cso is available; the last whether it
is appropriate.
a
conditional sentence can serve the sentencing principles of deterrence and
denunciation.  in
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5
, the court held:
22
the conditional sentence incorporates some
elements of non-custodial measures and some others of incarceration. because it
is served in the community, it will generally be more effective than
incarceration at achieving the restorative objectives of rehabilitation,
reparations to the victim and community, and the promotion of a sense of
responsibility in the offender. however,
it is also a punitive sanction
capable of achieving the objectives of denunciation and deterrence
. it is
this punitive aspect that distinguishes the conditional sentence from
probation, and it is to this issue that i now turn.
furthermore,
the court held that a cso is both a punishment and can be as harsh as
incarceration:
41
this is not to say that the conditional sentence
is a lenient punishment or that it does not provide significant denunciation
and deterrence, or that a conditional sentence can never be as harsh as
incarceration. as this court stated in
gladue
,
supra
, at
para. 72,
in
our view a sentence focused on restorative justice is not necessarily a
"lighter" punishment. some proponents of restorative justice argue
that when it is combined with probationary conditions it may in some circumstances
impose a greater burden on the offender than a custodial sentence.
a
conditional sentence may be as onerous as, or perhaps even more onerous than, a
jail term, particularly in circumstances where the offender is forced to take
responsibility for his or her actions and make reparations to both the victim
and the community, all the while living in the community under tight controls.
42
moreover, the conditional sentence is not subject
to reduction through parole. this would seem to follow from
s. 112(1)
of the
corrections and conditional release act
, s.c.
1992, c. 20, which gives the provincial parole board jurisdiction in respect of
the parole of offenders "serving sentences of imprisonment in provincial
correctional facilities" (
r. v. w. (j.)
(1997),
1997 canlii 3294 (on ca)
,
115
c.c.c. (3d) 18
(ont. c.a.)
at p. 33)
.
general sentencing principles
section
718
of the
criminal code
,
provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is "to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society."
this fundamental purpose is achieved by imposing
sanctions on offenders that have one or more of the following objectives:
• denouncing unlawful conduct;
• deterrence of the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
• separation of offenders from society, where
necessary;
• assisting in the rehabilitation of offenders;
• to provide for reparations of harm done to victims,
or the community; and
• to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders
and acknowledgment of harm done to victims and the community.
section
718.1
provides that "a
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender." section
718.2
further provides
that a sentence should be increased, or reduced, to account for any relevant
aggravating or mitigating circumstances. in section
718.2(a)
a number of
deemed aggravating circumstances are enumerated. section
718.2
goes on
to provide the following guidelines for arriving at a fit and proper sentence:
(b) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if
less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e) all available sanctions other than imprisonment
that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
the purpose, objectives, and principles of
sentencing set out in
s.718
and following, of the
code
, as
interpreted by the courts, provide the framework for the imposition of a fit
sentence on the offender.
a principled approach to sentencing requires an
analysis without prejudice or sympathy.
in
r. v. burghardt
,
2020 oncj 517
, at
para
34
, justice west wrote:
sentencing is
highly individualized (see r. v. m. (c.a.),
1996 canlii 230 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 500 (s.c.c.)
, at
paragraph
92
) and must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender. it is to be increased or reduced to
account for any aggravating or mitigating circumstances. it should strive to be
similar in relation to other sentences imposed on similar offenders in similar
circumstances.
the purpose of sentencing is to enhance the
protection of society.  sentences should reflect the gravity of the offence and
the degree of responsibility of the offender.  these factors can be
characterized as the moral culpability of the offender’s conduct.
in
r. v. vader
,
2019 abca 488
, para.
16
,
the court wrote:
in assessing moral blameworthiness, a sentencing judge
must consider all of the circumstances that bear on an offender's moral
culpability. this includes not only the nature of the unlawful act, but also
the degree of planning and deliberation involved in the unlawful act and any
other factor that is relevant to the offender's moral blameworthiness, such as
the personal characteristics of the offender that may aggravate or mitigate the
offender's moral culpability.
in
r. v. t.
,
2006 mbca 15
, the court
wrote:
24      denunciation of unlawful conduct is a discrete
principle of sentencing. it is one of the objectives of sentencing set out in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
. denunciation is "the communication of
society's condemnation of the offender's conduct" (lamer c.j.
in
r. v. proulx
,
1 s.c.r. 61
,
2000 scc 5 (s.c.c.)
at para.
102
). it is "a symbolic,
collective statement that the offender's conduct should be punished for
encroaching on our society's basic code of values" (lamer c.j.
in
r. v. m.
(c.a.)
,
1996 canlii 230 (scc)
,
1 s.c.r. 500 (s.c.c.)
at para.
81
. denunciation is typically
reserved for crimes that are particularly offensive or prevalent. when
applicable, it usually prevails over the principle of rehabilitation.
the principle of deterrence is succinctly
summarized in
r. v. bourgeois
2022 nbpc 2
as follows:
33      deterrence is subdivided into specific and
general elements. specific deterrence is designed to convince the offender
before the court not to re-offend. the circumstances of the offender and the
prospects for rehabilitation must be considered. a court must look at the
individual, his record and attitude, his motivation and his reformation and
rehabilitation.
34      general deterrence is aimed at persuading
others who may be inclined to commit the same offence from so doing. if this is
the aim, the sentencing court must consider the gravity of the offence, the
incidence of the crime in the community, the harm caused by it either to the
individual or to the community and the public attitude toward it.
the principle of rehabilitation is succinctly
summarized in
bourgeois
, supra
, as follows:
36      the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe
society, as is mandated by section 718, can often best be achieved by the
rehabilitation of offenders. as the supreme court of canada has held, "rehabilitation
is one of the fundamental moral values that distinguish canadian society from
the societies of many other nations in the world" (
see r. v. lacasse,
2015
scc 64
at para.
4
).
in
r. v. rawn
,
2012 onca 487
, paras.
17-18 and 30
, the court wrote:
17
the principle of
parity of sentences is set out in s. 718.2(b) of the code:
718.2 a court that imposes a sentence shall also take
into consideration the following principles:
(b) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
18      the parity principle serves to preserve
fairness by avoiding disparate sentences where similar facts relating to the
offence and the offender would suggest like sentences. see: clayton ruby, sentencing,
7th ed. (markham: lexisnexis canada inc., 2008), at para. 2.21.
30      in
r. v. issa
(1992),
57 o.a.c. 253
(ont. c.a.)
, this court expressed the role of the parity principle as follows,
at para. 9:
so long as sentencing remains an individual process
there maybe sentences meted out to offenders for participation in the same
offence which are justifiably disparate. [we] think that clayton ruby's
statement in sentencing is correct, that the rule against unreasonable
disparity in sentencing "does not require equal sentences, but only
understandable sentences when examined together." [citations omitted.]
in
r. v. batisse
,
2009 onca 114
, pp. 32,
the principle of restraint was reviewed:
32      the principle of restraint operates in three
ways in the present case. first, it is an important consideration because the
appellant was a first offender. as such, the restraint principle requires that
the sentencing judge consider all sanctions apart from incarceration and where,
as here, incarceration must be imposed, the term should be as short as possible
and tailored to the individual circumstances of the accused:
see r. v. priest
(1996),
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca)
,
30 o.r. (3d) 538 (ont. c.a.)
, at p. 545
.
33      second, the principle of restraint requires
the sentencing judge to consider rehabilitation in determining the appropriate
length of the sentence. in lowering a sentence given to a first offender, this
court
stated in
r. v. blanas
(2006),
2006 canlii 2610 (on ca)
,
207 o.a.c. 226 (ont. c.a.)
, at
para.
5
:
[g]eneral deterrence cannot be the sole consideration.
the appellant is relatively youthful and has no prior record and appears to
have the full support of her family and community. appropriate consideration
must be given to the rehabilitation of the appellant.
34      in serious cases and cases involving violence,
rehabilitation alone is not the determinative factor — general deterrence and
denunciation are also significant factors to be considered. however, as this
court ruled in
r. v. dubinsky
[2005 carswell ont 876 (ont. c.a.)
],
2005
canlii 5668
, at para.
1
, it is an error to focus almost exclusively on general
deterrence and fail to consider individual deterrence and rehabilitation,
especially when sentencing a first offender.
35      third, parliament has codified the principle
of restraint to limit the use of incarceration as a sentencing alternative,
particularly for aboriginal offenders.
subsection 718.2
(d) of the
criminal code
provides that "an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances".
subsection
718.2
(e) provides:
718.2 a court that imposes a sentence shall also take
into consideration the following principles:
(e) all available sanctions other than imprisonment
that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
immigration or collateral consequences
a
sentencing jurist may exercise her discretion to take collateral immigration
consequences into account but is not compelled to adjust a sentence in order to
fulfill those consequences,
r. v pham,
2013 scc 15
.
the
risk of deportation cannot justify the imposition of an inadequate or
artificial sentence, particularly for the purpose of circumventing parliament’s
will on matters of immigration,
r. v. badhwar,
2011 onca 266 (canlii)
,
o.j. no. 1541 (c.a.)
.
caselaw specific to abduction
both
counsel addressed the case of
r. v. marini,
(2014) bcpc 288 which is the
sentencing decision of justice skilnick; the trial decision, which is helpful
for the facts of the case, is cited as
r. v. marini,
2014 bcpc 3
.
factually,
mr. marini was convicted after trial of attempting to abduct a 12 year old
child from a public library. he commented to the child that his shoes looked
worn and offered to take him to buy new ones.  he asked the child repeatedly.
i
adopt the following passages of justice skilnick’s sentencing decision:
2      the innocence of
children is something that is precious and highly valued by our society and,
therefore, in sentencing persons who threaten those values and who commit an
offence under this section, the law has set out that deterrence and
denunciation are very important sentencing principles and, of course, counsel
have acknowledged this as well.
3      in sentencing
mr. marini for the offence that he has been convicted of, i am guided by a
number of parts of the
criminal code
and i am going to review some of those
just very briefly.
section 718
of the criminal code, as counsel has pointed
out, directs that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to contribute
respect for the law and maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
imposing just sanctions that have the following objectives: denouncing unlawful
conduct, deterring the specific offender and other like-minded persons from
committing offences, separating offenders from society where necessary,
assisting in the rehabilitation of offenders, providing for harm done to
victims or to the community and promoting a sense of responsibility in
offenders an acknowledgment done to victims and the community. again, as
counsel have pointed out, for an offence of this nature, deterrence and
denunciation are particularly important.
the prospect of harm coming to a
child is something that not only harms the child and the family but the
community as a whole and it is something that the community as a whole finds
abhorrent.
4
section 718.01
of the
criminal code
says that when a court imposes a sentence for an offence
that involves the abuse of a person under the age of 18, it shall give primary
consideration to the objectives of deterrence and denunciation of such conduct.
(emphasis added)
aggravating
in the
marini
, supra
, case was the fact that offence took place a few
months after he had been placed on a conditional sentence order for a sexual
assault against a teenaged boy, and as a result was on a
s. 161
order.
assistance in determining the appropriate sentence was had via a psychological
report in which it was opined that mr. marini was a low to moderate risk for
future sexual misconduct.
justice
skilnick’s review of the caselaw at the time suggested an appropriate sentence
was in the range from six to 30 months.  this was long before the supreme court
decision in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
.  the courts have garnered a
better understanding of the impact and harm upon children,(their families and
communities) when they are victimized.
mr.
marini was sentenced to 14 months custody, 36 months probation,
s.161
for life
and a soira order for life.
in
r. v. ellis
,
2023 nsca 63
, the court reduced a sentence of 2 years to 9
months for a mother who attempted to abduct her own 4 year old daughter.
at
paragraph 72, the court referenced
friesen
, supra,
and noted that the
principles therein should be considered:
consideration should be given to
friesen
as
the court stated the principles established therein can also be drawn upon when
imposing sentences for child abduction (para. 44). in
particular, the sentences must reflect the life altering consequences that can
and often do follow from these offences. specifically, courts must recognize
and give effect to (1) the inherent wrongfulness of these offences; (2) the
potential harm that flows from them; and (3) the actual harm that results. as a
result, upward departures from prior precedents and sentencing ranges may be
required to impose proportionate sentences (
friesen
, paras.
74, 75, 76 & 107
).
there
are scant reported sentencing decisions for the offence of attempted abduction,
and fewer for those involving persons unrelated to one another.
in
r. v. jones,
o.j. no. 5148
, following a guilty plea, the court
imposed a sentence 2 ½ years custody less 14 months presentence custody for the
attempted abduction of an infant from a maternity ward.
in
r. v. batisse
,
2009 onca 114
, the court considered four canadian cases
on infant abduction, allowed the sentence appeal and imposed a sentence of 2 ½ years
custody, in addition to presentence custody where a victimized mother who had
recently delivered stillborn child, abducted a new born infant from a maternity
ward.  ms. batisse had no criminal record, was a “30-year-old aboriginal woman”,
who had “survived an unimaginably abusive and cruel childhood, in which she was
physically, emotionally and sexual abused”.
in
re x,
2021 carswellnat 10435
, the immigration and refugee board of
canada noted that a review of the applicable caselaw suggests that the
appropriate sentence for abduction, or attempted abduction, depends on which of
the three categories or types of abduction occurred.  the court wrote:
the first category i describe as the "impulsive
abduction", where
the accused abducts his or her child and the child
is returned within a relatively brief period of time
. these types of
abductions usually end after an amber alert, as was the case before me. the
sentence imposed in this type of case has resulted in a suspended sentence —
see
r. v. lewin
,
2018 onca 882
; an 18 month conditional sentence — see
r.
v. baksh
,
o.j. no. 2398
, as well as a period of incarceration that
has ranged between three months and two years less a day — see
r. v. pasdari
,
o.j. no. 319 (ont. c.a.)
;
r. v. singh
,
b.c.j. no. 2409
(bcca)
;
r. v. mcbeath,
2014 bcca 305
.
the second type of case i describe as "the
retribution abduction". this type of abduction often occurs
where
there has been an acrimonious family law/custody fight and the accused seeks to
inflict the greatest harm on the other spouse, by abducting the child and
taking the child outside the jurisdiction of the court to a country where
canada has no ability to enforce its laws
the recent decision of molloy j. in
r. v.
c.
m.
l.
2016 onsc 4406
, is just one example where the court has reflected a
much higher sentence when one parent removes a child from canada, with no
intention of ever complying with a canadian court order requiring that the
child be returned to the lawful custodial parent. the court of appeal in
r.
v. li,
2017 onca 509
, upheld the decision of molloy j. in upholding the
sentence of seven years trotter j.a. noted at para. 41 that the crime was
ongoing, and that the father had been completely deprived of the right to
parent his child and, as such, had been completely excluded from the child's
life. in imposing the sentence that she did, molloy j. took into account that
the mother had no criminal record, and but for this mitigating fact would have
considered the maximum sentence of 10 years would have been appropriate (my
emphasis.)
the third type of child abduction is one that
might be described as "the hospital abduction".
this type of
abduction is characterized by an accused posing as a member of the hospital
staff, who then abducts a newborn from the maternity ward.
while lesage
j. in
r. v. hill
,
o.j. no. 4613
, imposed a sentence of seven
years in this type of abduction, the court of appeal
in
r. v. batisse
,
2009 onca 114 (canlii)
, recognizing the mental health issues of the accused
imposed a sentence of 2.5 years for this type of abduction. while not a
hospital abduction the accused in
r. v. nguyen
,
2008 oncj 367
, stole a
car that had a baby inside. the accused plead guilty to child abduction and
dangerous driving, and received a sentence of three years.
(emphasis added)
i
find that in fact there is a fourth category of abduction offences; those in
which a stranger abducts an unrelated child who is not an infant.  that is the
case herein, albeit an attempted abduction.
in
nguyen
, supra,
the defendant stole a running motor vehicle from a
driveway.  there was a 6 month old infant in the backseat.   he then drove
dangerously through residential neighborhoods and onto a major highway. he
ignored the crying of the infant, aware that he had taken the child when he
took the vehicle.  he plead guilty to dangerous driving and abduction. he had
emigrated to canada at 14 years of age.  he had a criminal record.  there were
immigration consequences at play.
mr.
nguyen was sentenced to 3 years in the penitentiary, less presentence custody.
conclusion
the conviction has been registered for an
attempt abduction, the maximum sentence is 5 years.
i find mr. balasooriyan’s moral culpability to
be high.
the defence position is wholly inappropriate and
contrary to the principles of sentencing, especially proportionality, moral
blameworthiness, denunciation and deterrence. it also does not align with any
of the caselaw presented or reviewed.  the suggested sentence is
disproportionate to the gravity of the offence.
the necessary reduction from an appropriate
sentence to one that would not cause mr. balasooriyan potential immigration consequences
would render the sentence inadequate and i find would then circumvent
parliament’s will on matters of immigration.
a conditional sentence is equally inappropriate
and in the circumstances of this offence and this offender, would not meet those
principles.
the gravity of the potential risk to the
community, to the children of the community is high, should mr. balasooriyan be
permitted to serve his sentence in the community.
this court has not been provided any insight
into his offending behaviour and thus cannot address the potentially
rehabilitative aspect of a conditional sentence.
additionally, mr. balasooriyan was on release at
the time of this offence and subsequently breached his release post his arrest
for this offence.  the safety of the community would be endangered by the
offender serving the sentence in the community. a conditional sentence would not
be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out
in
s
s. 718
to
718.2
.
the position of the crown is generous, very
generous. exercising the principle of restraint, i accept that position and in
respect of the attempted abduction impose a sentence of 420 days custody less 280
presentence days of custody enhanced to 420 days, leaving a remnant sentence of
zero days.  this is to be followed by 36 months probation, a dna order, a
s.
161
order, subsections (a)(a.1)(b)and (c) for 5 years, and a s. 109 order for
10 years.
in respect of the possession over $5000, i
impose a sentence of 60 days custody less 40 presentence days of custody
enhanced to 60 days, leaving a remnant sentence of zero days.  this is to be
followed by a concurrent 36 month probation order.
in respect of the breach of the release order, i
impose a sentence of suspended sentence and a concurrent 36 month probation
order.
released: february
6, 2025.
signed:
justice angela l. mcleod