ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. francis
, 2025 oncj 21
date:
2025 01 14
court
file no.:  newmarket 2103817k
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
chadwick francis
before
justice edward prutschi
heard
on april 24-25, 2023 (trial), december 2, 2024 (sentencing)
reasons
for judgment on sentence released on january 14, 2025
jeremy mutton and amy barkin..................................................... counsel
for the crown
darren sederoff..........................................
counsel for the accused chadwick francis
prutschi j.:
on april 18, 2021, chadwick francis was stopped
at a ride spot-check. after a brief investigation, he was discovered to be in
possession of a handgun and ammunition. a trial was held on april 24-25, 2023,
in which the sole issue raised was whether mr. francis had been racially
profiled during the spot-check and subsequent search of his vehicle. on june 8,
2023, i dismissed the racial profiling application and mr. francis was found guilty
of the following offences:
(i)
unauthorized possession of a restricted weapon
in a vehicle [s. 94(2)];
(ii)
careless storage of a firearm [s. 86(3)];
(iii)
careless storage of ammunition [s. 86(3)]; and
(iv)
possession of a loaded restricted firearm [s.
95(2)].
the detailed facts of the case along with my
reasons for judgment on the racial profiling argument are set out in
r. v.
francis
,
2023 oncj 242
. following those reasons, sentencing was adjourned
to allow for the creation of an enhanced pre-sentence report (“epsr”) that
would include not only general background on mr. francis but would provide
social context evidence outlining how mr. francis’ experiences as a black man
influenced his involvement in the criminal justice system.
through no fault of mr. francis, the epsr was
delayed for many months as the sentencing and parole project (“spp”) worked
through an extraordinary backlog. for this reason, we were only able to proceed
with his sentencing in december of 2024.
brief facts relevant to sentencing
mr. francis was stopped at a ride spot-check. when
asked about a strong odour of cannabis coming from his car, mr. francis
produced a small, unsealed packet of cannabis. this triggered a cannabis
control act (cca) search. while waiting outside the vehicle during the search,
one of the officers, noting that mr. francis was shivering, offered him the coat
from the drivers’ seat of the vehicle. mr. francis accepted. as the coat was
being passed to mr. francis, the officer felt an unusual weight to one of the pockets.
mr. francis said, “there’s something in there”. the officer then located a
loaded glock handgun.
further search of the vehicle produced a single
round of 9mm ammunition on the floor behind the drivers’ seat, a set of plastic
hardened knuckles and a folding knife in the centre console. a digital scale
with white residue along with a grinder were found in a mesh pocket behind the
passenger seat. a search of the trunk located a loader used to resupply a
handgun magazine with rounds of ammunition.
position of the parties
the crown attorney seeks a global sentence of
3.5 years in jail.
mr. francis urges me to impose a conditional
sentence order (cso) of two years less one day.
principles of sentencing
the aim of any criminal sentence is to protect the
public while contributing to respect for the law in a manner that helps to
maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society. this goal is at the core of the
sentencing principles outlined in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
.
a sentencing judge attempts to achieve this goal
by imposing just sanctions which balance and address the specific sentencing
principles including denunciation, both general and specific deterrence, and
rehabilitation. a well-crafted sentence will promote a sense of responsibility
in the offender and an acknowledgement of the harm they have caused to the
community.
the overarching goal of a fit sentence is to
impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence
committed, and the degree of responsibility of the person who committed it. in
the case of first offenders, and particularly for youthful offenders, the
principle of restraint demands that i carefully consider all options for a
non-custodial sentence before turning to jail. even where jail is called for,
the sentence should be as short as possible to address the needs of
denunciation and deterrence while leaving the doorway to rehabilitation open as
widely as possible. for these reasons, sentencing is necessarily a highly
individualized process, and each sentence must be customized and tailored to
the circumstances of the specific offender and their specific offences.
social context and the epsr
the degree of responsibility of an offender
requires a consideration of the person’s moral blameworthiness. this is
necessarily impacted by unique factors in an offender’s background, life
experiences, and personal circumstances.
in the case of mr. francis, i am assisted in
understanding his personal circumstances by the completion of the epsr. this
document situates mr. francis’ history and background within the larger
disadvantaged social context experienced by black canadians.
such social context evidence assists me as a
sentencing judge in my assessment of mr. francis’ degree of responsibility for
these offences. it also helps me to appropriately balance the various
principles and objectives of sentencing by properly framing them within the
broader societal backdrop experienced by black persons in canada.
while mr. francis is not required to demonstrate
that systemic racism was the direct cause of his criminal conduct, his epsr
does establish a connection between the social context he grew up in and his
terrible decision to arm himself with a gun.
mr. francis is now 32 years old and was 29 at
the time of these offences. he was born in toronto and raised primarily by his
mother with his father seeing him only a few isolated times in his life. his
mother is a registered nurse who often worked 12-hour shifts. despite the
challenges of being a single parent, she lovingly dedicated herself to raising
mr. francis and emphasized discipline at home in the hopes that – as she put it
– her son would not become “a statistic”.
mr. francis was raised in a middle-class
bungalow in the canlish neighbourhood of toronto’s scarborough community. it
was a racially diverse area beside a low-income housing complex where mr.
francis spent much of his time. mr. francis reported that toronto police had a
strong and visible presence in his neighborhood, and he experienced what he
described as racial profiling in how the officers dealt with black people in
the community.
he recalls being chased by police through the
fields of a local community centre when he was a youth and says he was often
harassed along with other black youth for simply playing basketball at a local
court. he felt that he was “roughed up” and “punished” by police whenever they
caught up with him after he ran away, even though he had done nothing wrong.
this sense of being racially profiled continued into adulthood as mr. francis
described being stopped countless times while driving.
mr. francis’ early education was largely
unremarkable. as he grew older, he began to exhibit a more defiant streak and
was suspended several times for fighting. he recalled one of those fights
erupting when a classmate called him the n-word. mr. francis was expelled from
his grade 12 school for behavioural problems. he transferred briefly to an
alternative school before finishing his secondary school credits.
mr. francis began his early employment career in
various construction roles including painting. recently, while on bail awaiting
this sentencing, he secured a job as a drone operator for a commercial
construction company. mr. francis is very proud of this position where he sees
opportunity for advancement. although he has been working in this role for
approximately one year, he recognizes that a jail sentence is likely to be a
significant set-back for him on his employment path.
about one year before these offences mr. francis
was in his car with his friend following a rap performance they had attended.
they heard gunshots and found a man pointing a gun at mr. francis demanding he
hand over his jewellery. mr. francis was dragged out of the car at gunpoint and
a fight broke out. shots were fired and several people who were in the area
were injured. mr. francis recognized that he was very fortunate to have escaped
unscathed. he experienced feelings of anger and frustration at having been
robbed. he felt that police were unhelpful in curbing such crimes and his negative
childhood experiences with police contributed to his decision to take steps for
his own protection. this, according to the epsr, was the catalyst for mr.
francis choosing to arm himself and why he was carrying a loaded firearm at the
fateful ride stop a year later.
in summary, the epsr paints a picture of a man
who grew up in a modest but not impoverished family. he experienced some
elements of friction with the constant presence of uniformed police in his neighborhood
and faced some barriers to an equitable education arising from racism that
manifested in his classrooms. these shaped his adult life and created a layer
of distrust towards police which was only exacerbated each time he was
subjected to a traffic stop.
the moderate impact of systemic racism on mr.
francis only marginally impacts his own moral blameworthiness in the circumstances
of this case. however, the epsr reveals that the dominant factor in mr.
francis’ decision to arm himself with a handgun was his own victimization at
the hands of gun violence. this eye-for-an-eye approach clearly does nothing to
excuse his conduct, but it does inform his moral blameworthiness when i
consider what influenced mr. francis to carry a gun.
eligibility for a cso
section 742.1
of the
criminal code
governs the availability of conditional sentences. none of the offences mr.
francis has been found guilty of are statutorily excluded from conditional
sentence consideration.
to be eligible for a conditional sentence i must
first be satisfied that the appropriate sentence in these specific
circumstances is less than two years imprisonment. if i reach that conclusion,
i am must further be satisfied that a conditional sentence does not endanger
the safety of the community and that it is consistent with the fundamental
principles of sentencing discussed earlier.
it is well established that even the principles
of denunciation and general deterrence can be adequately addressed by a
suitably punitive conditional sentence in the right circumstances.
factors to be considered on sentencing
a.
the spectrum of firearms possession
the possession of prohibited and restricted
firearms spans a broad range of illegal activity that attract different levels
of moral blameworthiness depending on where one falls along that spectrum. at
the low end of the range is the lawful licenced firearm owner who stores an
unloaded weapon together with readily accessible ammunition. this offender is
guilty of something very close to a regulatory infraction that might attract
little or no jail sentence. at the other end of the spectrum is the offender
who chooses to arm themselves with a handgun because it is a necessary tool of a
violent criminal trade such as drug trafficking. this offender’s conduct should
attract extreme sanctions that include lengthy jail terms even for first
offenders.
mr. francis lies between these two extremes. he
had no authorization or license for the handgun. the weapon was loaded with an
additional round of ammunition found loose in his car and a magazine loader
accessible in the trunk to aid in the quick resupply of further ammunition. the
gun was carried in his jacket pocket, readily available to him at a moment’s
notice while driving on a public roadway. carrying it in this manner put
everyone around him at risk but posed a particular danger to the police
officers engaged in the ride spot check.
also near mr. francis was a set of hardened
knuckles and a knife located in the centre console of his car. a digital scale
with white residue and a grinder were found in the same vehicle. while these
are circumstances that give rise to some reasonable suspicion, the crown
conceded that there was no evidence proving mr. francis was involved in any
peripheral criminality. collectively this places mr. francis in the middle of
the firearms possession spectrum.
b.
motive for possessing a firearm
i accept at face value mr. francis’ assertion (outlined
in the epsr) that he began carrying the gun for his own protection after
becoming the victim of a violent gun-point robbery himself about a year prior
to these offences. while this information provides an explanation for his
decision, it by no means excuses it. the choice to respond to gun violence by
acquiring a gun simply feeds the continuing cycle of tragedy wrought by
firearms in this province. as the caselaw i review below indicates, an offender’s
motivation for choosing to possess an illegal gun is of some limited mitigating
value, but it does not substantially impact the appropriate sentencing range.
c.
the appropriate sentencing range
although the supreme court of canada struck down
the mandatory minimum penalties that would otherwise have applied in this case,
it is sometimes forgotten that the court still upheld a significant
penitentiary jail sentence for mr. nur who was a 19 year old first offender in
possession of a loaded handgun unconnected to any other criminality.
the crown provided me with a sampling of cases
that dealt largely with other youthful first offenders. several of the cases
can be distinguished from mr. francis’ circumstances by virtue of prior
criminal records, poor rehabilitative prospects, or the existence of other
criminality associated with the gun possession. all of them however suggest
that possession of a loaded firearm calls for a strong denunciatory sentence
that would generally be outside of the condition sentence range. while i have
considered all of the cases drawn to my attention by the crown, the following three
were particularly instructive in helping to fix the appropriate sentencing
range.
r. v. marsan
,
2020 oncj 638
mr. marsan was only 20 years old with no prior
criminal record and of good character at the time of his arrest for possession
of a loaded firearm. he entered a guilty plea at a very early stage and did exceptionally
well on bail, complying with restrictive conditions and completing a six-week
addiction program plus its follow up. he also performed 107 hours of volunteer
work.
he had possessed the gun for protection after
having been robed at gunpoint when he was 16. later he suffered another violent
attack that left with him with a head and shoulder injury. these two events contributed
to ptsd that was a factor in his decision to arm himself. though not readily
available on his person as it was with mr. francis, mr. marsan’s gun was found
in a satchel in the trunk of his car.
justice pringle concluded that possession of a
firearm for protection neither excuses nor mitigates that seriousness at the
core of this offence. she noted at paragraph 21 that,
the moral culpability in committing this
offence remains high, no matter the reason for committing it. the gun was
loaded, meaning mr. marsan was prepared to use it. there is no ‘safe’
possession of illegal firearms on the streets of toronto. it is a most serious
offence.
justice pringle conducted an extensive review of
the relevant caselaw at paragraph 29 of her decision and i have benefited
greatly from these efforts. after reviewing numerous other appellate and scj
authorities, she concluded that the range of sentence for gun possession by a
first offender is between 3 and 5 years where the possession is connected to
other criminal activity. citing the onca decision in
r. v. smickle
,
2014
onca 49
, she further concluded that gun possession unconnected to other
criminal activity still calls for a jail sentence near the maximum reformatory
sentence.
having found the range encompasses sentences
within the cso target, justice pringle went on to consider the appropriateness
of a community sentence. though a cso would not endanger the safety of the
community, she found that it was simply inconsistent with the fundamental
purposes and principles of sentencing as such a sentence for “driving around
toronto armed with a loaded illegal firearm” is incapable of satisfying the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence.
r. v. mohiadin
,
2021 onca 122
though the onca treated this sentence appeal as
a fresh hearing, they nevertheless imposed a 3 year jail sentence on a 19 year
old first offender. mr. mohiadin had not entered a guilty plea but his trial,
much like that of mr. francis, was focused solely on a
charter
application
with the balance of the case conceded.
mr. mohiadin’s brother had died of gun violence,
and this motivated him to possess a gun himself. his prospects for
rehabilitation were considered excellent.
r. v. mesinele
,
2023 oncj 28
mr. mesinele was also 19 years old with no prior
criminal history when he was found guilty after a
charter
focused trial.
justice felix found mr. mesinele to be genuinely remorseful and was clearly
impressed by the meaningful comments delivered by the young man during his
allocution. mr. mesinele had been the victim of a stabbing though this was not
cited as a direct catalyst for his decision to acquire a gun.
in addressing the application of social context
evidence for black offenders, justice felix noted at paragraph 31 that
racialized communities – like the broader general ontario community – expect courts
to meaningfully denounce and deter the possession of illegal firearms in the
hopes that such actions might lead to improved safety on their streets.
justice felix highlighted the “epidemic of
firearm-related crime in the gta” in concluding that sentences for the
possession of illegal firearms should be increasing. he noted his own comments
in
r. v. rudder
,
2022 oncj 367
, where he described the public as being
understandably “fed up” with gun crime.
after a thorough review of the caselaw he
concluded that the appropriate range of sentence in such circumstances was 3 to
3.5 years though he adjusted that downwards to two years and ten months after
considering mitigating factors.
this sentence clearly put a cso outside the
permissible range though justice felix went further and noted at paragraph 82
that a conditional sentence would not be consistent with the principles of
sentencing: “bluntly, a conditional sentence would not provide sufficient
denunciation to those who would voluntarily possess loaded illegal handguns in
our society.”
the defence also provided me with a sampling of
recent cases where conditional sentences were imposed in gun possession cases. these
cases suggest that, particularly for young, racialized offenders who arm
themselves in response to prior history with personal violence, a conditional sentence
can properly address all the relevant sentencing principles. as with the
crown’s cases, i will not review every precedent to which my attention was
drawn, but i highlight the following as providing an important and reasoned
counterpoint to the crown’s authorities.
r. v. beharry
,
2022 onsc 4370
mr. beharry was 32 years old with no previous
criminal record when he was sentenced for carrying a loaded handgun in a fanny pack
on the back seat of his car. he possessed the gun for personal protection
arising out of his experiences growing up and living in a neighbourhood frequented
by gun violence.
justice schreck, noting the seriousness of gun
possession, stated that the “motive for possessing the firearm has only a
limited mitigating effect” (at paragraph 23) though he does distinguish such
cases from those where offenders possess a gun to further another criminal
purpose (at paragraph 24).
like mr. francis, mr. beharry had the benefit of
an epsr which set out his personal historical experiences against the backdrop
of broader social context evidence for black canadians. mr. beharry grew up fatherless
and in poverty. he never completed his education and had dim employment
prospects. he lived in an area plagued by crime and drug use and grew up with having
frequent negative experiences with police.
justice schreck noted that none of these factors
excused mr. beharry’s bad choices but, “consideration of his choices in the
context of his background leads to the conclusion that his degree of
responsibility is less than it would have been had his background been different”
(at paragraph 28).
in determining the appropriate sentencing range,
justice schreck cited the well-established 3-5 year term for situations where
gun possession is associated to other criminal activity such as drug
trafficking. he however noted that lower sentences in the upper reformatory or
lower penitentiary range could apply to mid-spectrum gun possession “where the
firearm is not possessed in connection with other criminal activity” (at
paragraph 31). after considering the aggravating and mitigating factors, justice
schreck concluded that a two-year sentence was appropriate for mr. beharry. he
therefore went on to consider if a conditional sentence could adequately
address the relevant sentencing principles.
justice schrek provided an important reminder to
sentencing judges when he noted at paragraph 43 that,
all of the sentencing objectives, including
denunciation, deterrence and rehabilitation, are subordinate to the fundamental
purpose of sentencing set out in s. 718 of the
code
, which is to “protect
society”. arguably, the objective of rehabilitation, where rehabilitative
prospects exist, will go further towards achieving the fundamental purpose of
sentencing than sentences designed to give effect to the objective of general
deterrence, which empirical evidence suggests has uncertain effect.
with this in mind, after balancing the
aggravating and mitigating factors, justice schreck concluded that a
conditional sentence would most appropriately achieve that over-arching goal of
protecting society.
without reviewing in detail the balance of the
cases presented by counsel for mr. francis, i note that there is a growing body
of caselaw in which carefully crafted conditional sentences have been imposed
to address gun possession cases where substantially mitigating circumstances
exist.
these stand in contrast to a large body of precedent which emphasizes the
necessity of deterrence and denunciation leading to a conclusion that a
penitentiary sentence is required. suffice it to say, the job of a sentencing
judge in such circumstances is highly complex and both approaches find support in
well-reasoned decisions by courts at various levels across ontario.
the sentencing range therefore for a first
offender possessing a gun unconnected to other criminality spans a maximum
reformatory term of two years less one day, to a low-end penitentiary sentence
of up to 3.5 years in jail. with this in mind, i turn now to outlining the
specific circumstances facing mr. francis.
d.
aggravating factors
the proliferation of firearms in our society is
one of the most disturbing and concerning criminal justice trends of the last decade.
gun violence has penetrated every major city in canada impacting not just
criminals who violently ply their trade on the streets of our neighborhoods,
but entirely innocent residents who have the misfortune to become collateral
statistics of such violence.
at the forefront of combatting this trend are
the rank-and-file police officers who are exposed to extraordinary danger in
every confrontation and traffic stop where they interact with someone who
happens to be armed with an illegal handgun.
even without a connection to other criminality,
the mere possession of a loaded illegal firearm poses extreme risk and
constitutes a serious crime in and of itself. an offender’s motivation to
protect themselves does little to diminish the danger they introduce to our streets
by choosing to arm themselves in this way. to have a loaded handgun in arm’s
reach while driving a car in public demonstrates a willingness to use that gun should
the situation deteriorate. this is highly aggravating criminal conduct that
demands strong sanction even for a first offender.
e.
mitigating factors
many of the cases in which serious consideration
is given to the possibility of a conditional sentence involve very youthful
first offenders who have entered a guilty plea. mr. francis’ situation bears
both similarities and differences to this archetype.
importantly, he has no prior criminal record.
though he did not enter a guilty plea, his trial proceeded in a focussed manner
with the issues narrowed solely to the question of racial profiling. his choice
to exercise his right to a trial cannot be held against him, though it does
limit the mitigation impact that is associated with an early guilty plea.
the term ‘youthful’ is difficult to quantify
with precision. it is well established that the immaturity of a youthful
offender bears some relevance to their moral culpability, and this is most
commonly seen in offenders in their late teenaged years or early twenties. mr.
francis was 29 years old at the time of his offences and i find it would be an
improper stretch to characterize his decision to obtain and carry a handgun as
some form of youthful indiscretion.
at the same time, i recognize that he has the
potential for a fulsome life ahead of him that today appears to be on a very positive
trajectory. he secured meaningful employment as a drone operator for a
commercial construction company and should be applauded for having obtained and
maintained this job while facing the challenges of his impending trial and
during his time on bail.
his success while on nearly 44 months of bail
that included residency and curfew conditions makes me very optimistic about
his potential for rehabilitation. he is surrounded by a loving and supportive
family represented by his mother, uncle and girlfriend who have attended court
with him many times. this very lengthy period of time on release is a highly
unusual circumstance of this case.
for various reasons, both the trial and
sentencing proceeded at a much slower pace than normal. this delay served as a
double-edged sword for mr. francis. throughout that time he was under close
scrutiny and subject to bail compliance checks including ensuring that he was
abiding by his nightly curfew conditions. to his great credit, mr. francis not
only complied with all the terms of his release but managed to make meaningful
rehabilitative progress by securing and maintaining improved employment. while
past performance is not necessarily indicative of future success, mr. francis
has demonstrated in the most concrete way possible that he can thrive while
under court-imposed conditions without putting the public at risk.
during his allocution mr. francis expressed
remorse about his decision to carry a gun noting that he put others at risk,
ruined his strong work opportunities, and let his mother down. he indicated
that he had spent a great deal of time thinking about his situation and
recognized that he made a “stupid” and “senseless” choice that was rooted in
“selfishly not thinking about anyone else”. he acknowledged that he allowed his
past experiences as the victim of violence to cloud his judgment.
the fit sentence for mr. francis
if a conditional sentence served only the needs
of mr. francis, though still compelling, i would not have imposed it. i have
however concluded that in his specific circumstances, the interests of the
public are substantially better served by a community sentence over a lengthy
period of incarceration. i say
this cognizant of a number of factors.
first, i note the huge economic costs that would
be associated with jailing mr. francis. i am also acutely aware of the
deteriorating conditions in many of our jails – both provincial reformatories
and federal penitentiaries – where overcrowding has contributed to startling
conditions that would shock the conscience of reasonable canadians should they
ever have the misfortune to observe the realities inside of the prison walls.
a jail sentence of any meaningful length would
shatter the stable and positive employment mr. francis has secured. it is to
his great credit that mr. francis was not paralyzed by his impending sentence
into inaction, but rather acquired a new job and held it for over a year while
on bail conditions that included a nightly curfew. steady lawful employment is
perhaps the single most important factor in ensuring an individual's pro-social
stability as they contribute economically to the betterment of their community.
i have also considered the risks of placing a
relatively young man with a good job and no prior criminal record into an
environment where, for years, his primary social group and influence would be a
population consisting entirely of other criminals. to expect mr. francis to
emerge from such an environment as a better more pro-social human being
requires a level of optimism bordering on folly.
finally, i note that a conditional sentence can
be combined with a term of probation – an option not open to me when imposing a
penitentiary sentence. the probation order creates an offramp from the more
restrictive conditional sentence which helps to ensure mr. francis is
supervised by the courts for an extended period of time while he continues
along a rehabilitative path.
i return to the analysis of justice schreck in
beharry
.
deterrence and denunciation are important drivers for sentencing in firearms
offences. yet the ultimate goal of any sentence is not punitive vengeance but the
protection of the public. there are many instances in which the best way to
protect the public from an offender involved in gun crimes is jail. for all its
faults, prison is highly successful at separating an offender from the public
and ensuring they do not harm anyone outside the prison walls over the course
of their sentence. but protection of the public does not end when the jail term
ends. in my view the public is best protected from mr. francis if he is able to
continue to progress along the positive path he has started down these past 44
months.
for all of these reasons, it is clear to me that
a conditional sentence not only presents no safety risk to the community but,
on the contrary, is capable of contributing to the rehabilitation of mr. francis
in a way that actually strengthens his surrounding community.
the sentence will therefore be, concurrent on
all counts, a conditional sentence order of two years less one day. in addition
to the statutory conditions mr. francis is subject to the following conditions
for the totality of the cso:
•
report to his conditional sentence supervisor
(css) today and thereafter as required.
•
reside at an address approved of by his css and
not change that address without obtaining the prior consent of the css in advance.
•
not be in possession of any weapons as defined
by the
criminal code
.
•
complete 150 hours of community service on a
rate and schedule to be determined by your css. this community service is to be
completed within the first 18 months of the cso.
•
seek and maintain full time employment or attend
school on a full time basis.
additionally, for the first 18 months of the
cso, mr. francis is subject to gps-monitored home confinement and is to remain on
the property of his approved address at all times unless in accordance with one
of the following exceptions:
•
medical emergencies involving yourself or a
member of your immediate family.
•
travelling directly to and from, or while being
at: school, employment, the performance of community service, court attendances,
religious services, and legal / medical or dental appointments. the schedule
for these activities is to be confirmed at least 48 hours in advance with your
css.
•
each saturday between the hours of 11:00am and
3:00pm for the purposes of acquiring the necessities of life.
•
for all other purposes, with the written
approval of your css. this approval is to be carried on your person during
these times.
you will comply with all the requirements of the
gps monitoring program provided by the ministry of the solicitor general. the
gps rules and protocols will be attached to this order as schedule “a”.
for the last 6 months of the cso, you are
subject to a curfew each and every night from 10pm to 6am. the only exceptions
to this curfew are for:
•
medical emergencies involving your or a member
of your immediate family; or
•
with the prior written approval of your css with
such approval carried on your person during these times.
upon the completion of your cso, you are further
subject to a probation order for a period of 18 months. in addition to the
statutory terms of all probation orders, you are:
•
to report to your probation officer (po) within
3 business days of the completion of your cso and thereafter as directed by
your po.
•
reside at an address approved of by your po and
not change that address without obtaining the prior written consent of the po
in advance.
•
not to be in possession of any weapons as
defined by the
criminal code
; and
•
continue to seek or maintain full time
employment or attend school on a full time basis.
you are also subject to the following ancillary
orders:
•
pursuant to
s. 109
of the
criminal code
you are prohibited for a period of 10 years from possessing any firearm,
crossbow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition,
prohibited ammunition and explosive substances.
•
possession of a restricted firearm is a
secondary designated dna offence and, despite the absence of any criminal
record, the seriousness of this offence and its circumstances satisfies me that
it is in the best interests of justice to require you to provide a dna sample
in accordance with
s. 487.051(3)
(b) of the
criminal code
.
finally, the crown proceeded by indictment on
these charges and mr. francis has been gainfully employed for at least the past
year. i will allow him 120 days to pay the associated victim fine surcharges
that attach to these charges.
released:  january 14, 2025
signed:
justice edward prutschi
r. v. nur
,
2015 scc 15
.
in addition to the cases i have explicitly reviewed here, the crown also drew
my attention to the cases of
r. v. clarke brown
,
2021 oncj 378
;
r. v.
marshall
,
2015 onca 692
; and
r. v. henry-robinson
,
2022 oncj 302
.
see for example,
r. v. edwards
,
2023 oncj 53
;
r. v. fagan
,
2024 onsc
2718
;
r. v. filian-jimenez
,
2014 onca 601
;
r. v. hussey-rodrigues
,
2024 onsc 2671
and;
r. v. stewart
,
2024 onsc 281
.