ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. b.m.,
2025 oncj 154
date:
2025 03 17
court
file no.:  pembroke 998 23-37300063
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
bm
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on june 11; december 9, 2024; january 8, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 17, 2025
james bocking................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
mark huckabone............................................................................. counsel
for the accused
richardson j.:
introduction
the issue in this case is the appropriate
sentence for a 68-year-old man who surreptitiously recorded pornographic images
and videos of two neighbour boys as they showered in his bathroom.
facts
on june 11, 2024, bm entered guilty pleas to the
following offences:
a)
making child pornography, contrary to
section 163.1(2)
of the
criminal
code
;
and
b)
surreptitiously making a visual recording of a person in
circumstances that gave rise to a reasonable expectation of privacy, contrary
to
section 162(1)
of the
criminal code
.
the crown elected to proceed by indictment.
the offences took place in the township of
bonnechere valley between the 1
st
day of january, 2019 and the 3
rd
day of february, 2023.
ax and bx
are two brothers who reside with their parents.  they are neighbours to bm.
ax and bx often worked at the home of bm doing
odd jobs.  after these odd jobs, some of which were dirty jobs, bm invited the
boys to take a shower in his bathroom.
the floor in the bathroom was heated.  bm also
told the boys that there was an air diffuser in the bathroom which needed to be
plugged in before they took a shower.  bm laid out a towel and slippers for the
boys to use after they had showers.  bm would often invite the boys over to do
some work.  he always suggested that they have a shower after working.
at first the boys thought nothing of it and they
routinely had a shower at bm’s house after they did their work.  the frequent
invitations to the boys to have a shower, coupled with reminders to plug in the
diffuser made them suspicious.
on february 2, 2023, ax went over to bm’s
residence to assist him with some chores.  after the chores, as is the normal
course, bm invited ax to have a shower while he made dinner.  ax went into the
bathroom and discovered a cord that led to four usb ports.  he found cameras
and memory cards.
once he discovered this, ax ran the shower as if
to simulate that he was using it.  he got dressed.  he took photos of what he
saw and sent them to his brother.  he then went home and told his parents.
his parents called police.
police executed a search warrant at bm’s
residence.  they recovered memory cards with pornographic images of ax and bx.
police also located burned circuit boards and hard drives in the fireplace.
after hearing the plea, i ordered the
preparation of a pre-sentence report and a report pursuant to section 21 of the
mental health act
.
the pre-sentence report
bm is 68 years of age.
he was born in pembroke and raised on a beef
farm near cormac, ontario.   his father also worked as a municipal civil
servant.
he is one of four children.  there were no
issues with addiction or domestic violence in his home growing up.
like many rural children in ontario in the 1950s
and early 1960s, bm went to school in a one-room schoolhouse until about grade
5.  he was then bussed to a school in eganville where he finished his
elementary school.  for high school, he was also bussed to eganville to attend
opeongo high school.
while in high school, he was active in athletic
council and student council.  he was the student council president in his final
year at opeongo.  he also represented opeongo on a school board advisory
committee.
bm moved to ottawa to attend university at
carleton, where he earned his degree in law and political science.
he moved back home after university and worked
on the farm.   while he was doing this, he was elected and served on his
municipal council for five years.
he accepted a short-term contract for employment
with the federal public service and his career took off.  he was a member of
the federal civil service for over 30 years.  he retired in 2020.  when he
retired, he was an assistant commissioner for the canada revenue agency with
responsibility for, among other things, 6800 employees.  he has had a
distinguished career; he has won several awards and he has represented canada
internationally.
after he retired, he returned home to cormac to
help look after his parents.  he lives very close to their residence in a home
that he had built 35 years ago.
bm is legally blind.  bm started having
difficulties with his sight about twenty years ago.  he has been diagnosed with
corneal dystrophy.  he is not able to make out anything clearly.  he must dim
the lighting to read, wear strong prescription glasses and use a magnifier.  bm
also has psoriasis and uses a medicated shampoo to prevent bleeding in his
scalp.  aside from these issues he is in good health.
bm’s parents are still alive.  his mother is 89
and his father is 94.  they live on the family farm where his father, despite
his age and the onset of some dementia, still has 25 head of cattle.
bm is their primary caregiver.  he lives close
to them and makes their lunch every day.  he assists with the cattle and other
chores around the house.  his mother still drives and she takes bm to town for
his errands because he is unable to drive due to his blindness.  he assists his
parents with paying their bills.
bm is close with his family.  he has healthy
relationships with all of his siblings and all but one of his seven nieces and
nephews.  one of his nephews has become “distant” since the charges arose.  he
has provided financial, academic and emotional support.
the certainty of bm’s incarceration has made it
difficult for the family.  other siblings will have to step up to replace bm’s
role with his parents.  some do not live in the area.
bm never married.  he has no children.
bm expressed significant remorse in relation to
the complainants.
the section 21 report
i ordered the preparation of a report pursuant
to section 21 of the
mental health act
.  the report was prepared by dr.
sanjiv gulati, who is the associate chief of the integrated forensic program and
director of the sexual behaviours clinic at the royal ottawa hospital.
i will not repeat information that was already
set out in the pre-sentence report.
during his meetings with dr. gulati, bm admitted
“full responsibility” for his offences and “showed large amounts of remorse”.  although
he reported that at the time, he did not think he was doing anything wrong, he now
understands and expresses sympathy for the pain caused to the victims and their
family.  he also expressed sadness about breaking the trust which the victims
and their family had in him.
he did not think he had a sexual problem of any
kind.  he expressed concern for how his parents will cope if he is
incarcerated.  he expressed hope that there were minimal victim impacts.
bm stated that he was “raised catholic”.  he now
identifies as “mildly religious” and a “soft catholic”.  he takes his parents
to church.
he stated that he was “mildly social” with
others.  he did not describe himself as a “loner”, but acknowledged spending a
lot of time by himself and being “comfortable in my own niche”.
in addition to the medical problems outlined
above, he has had pain in his rotator cuff as a result of a fall.  he also
stated that some melanomas were discovered on his back.  at the time that the
report was written, those were under investigation.
he does not have any psychiatric history.
he considered suicide for the first time in his
life after the charges were laid.
with respect to his sexual orientation, he told
dr. gulati:
i am gay, but
i am not out. i did have a good female friend for a decade but it was
platonic.  she was a good friend.  i had other good friends over the years that
filled emotional intimacy roles.  but i didn’t talk about my sexuality.
friends never explicitly or even implicitly asked.  people i guess just minded
their business.  they may have assumed.  i don’t know.
i don’t feel
an obligation to share my sexual orientation.  with my charges some of my
family now knows, like my siblings but i am not going to tell my parents at
their age with everything that they are going through on their own, like old
age and dementia.
i think i was
ashamed of it [being gay] when i was younger and to a certain extent i still am
ashamed.  i was always afraid that the information would hurt my parents.
bm admitted to having one incident of oral sex
while travelling internationally.  apart from that, he has never had a sexual
relationship with anyone.  he told dr. gulati:
the whole anal
sex thing never appealed to me.  you see it in pornography but it was just
never on the top of my list.  if you are in the closet, you have got to stay in
the closet so you just never step over that line.
he also expressed concern that if he disclosed
his sexual orientation it would put his job at risk.  he stated:
then there was
my top secret security clearance which started early in my career with the
government.  i sort of felt like i had to either disclose it [my sexuality] early
or i needed to not do things that could put my job at risk.  so that’s how i
felt at the time.  it was the understanding that if i engaged in homosexual
activities i would expose myself to blackmail.  i was in positions where i had
knowledge where it would have been of interest to other parties where i could
have been blackmailed.
he added:
i felt more of
a loss from the friendship and companionship that a relationship would have
given me than the loss of sex.  i didn’t feel an overwhelming need to go out
and hook up.  it’s not to say i wouldn’t see an attractive man and feel
interested.  i wasn’t asexual.  i think those circumstances led me more to a
life of celibacy, although i was masturbating to thoughts of men.
he also stated:
i know there
isn’t anything wrong with being gay.  it has more to do with my parents.  with
the consequences of telling other people.  my worry about being gay 20 years
ago would have been 8/10, now i would say is a 3/10.  now that my job with high
security clearance is over, it is less pertinent.  but i also do live in the
country and people can be a bit more conservative or a bit ‘red neck’ so its
better to keep it in private.  i don’t think i am repressed.
bm stated that he now masturbates six to eight
times a month.
he admits to watching pornography when he
masturbates.  he stated that he is a member of a legal site that focusses on
gay pornography.
he denied any sexual interest in children or
animals.  he also denied using internet chat lines, web cameras, social media,
bathhouses and swing clubs.  he denied ever paying for sex.  he has never had
any sexually transmitted disease and stated that when he was in his early 20s
he also abstained from sex due to fear of aids.
testing revealed that bm’s testosterone level
was within the normal range.
other psychometric testing revealed:
a)
a low score for anger.
b)
no history of substance abuse.
c)
he does not endorse any sexual statements typically endorsed by
sexual offenders against adult women or those typically endorsed by men who
have sexually abused children.
d)
he scores within the expected range for impulsiveness.
e)
there was no evidence that he was attempting to present himself in a
positive light or minimize his personal shortcomings.
phallometric testing revealed that he responds
to adult consensual homosexual and heterosexual sex.  with respect to the
heterosexual sex, he stated that he found the man in the video attractive.
this is consistent with other aspects of the report where bm indicated that he
sometimes masturbates to heterosexual pornography because he finds the men
attractive.
phallometric testing also revealed that he did
not respond positively to nonconsensual heterosexual adult sex, heterosexual
pedophilia or homosexual pedophilia.
using the static-99r risk assessment tool, dr.
gulati scored bm as a low risk to reoffend.
dr. gulati diagnosed bm with adjustment disorder
brought about by the charges. since being charged, bm has had nightmares and
panic attacks.  he dwells on incarceration. as noted above, he expressed some
suicidal thoughts.  he has bouts of anxiousness.
other than this adjustment disorder, bm does not
suffer from any other psychiatric disorders or symptoms.
dr. gulati noted that if bm were to be
incarcerated, he recommended that incarceration take place at the st. lawrence
valley treatment centre or the ontario correctional institute.   he also
recommended that if bm were to receive a disposition that involved treatment,
that he be required to receive a follow up assessment of the sexual behaviours
clinic at the royal ottawa mental health centre.
the victim impact statements
ax poignantly described his relationship with bm
until the offences took place this way:
[bm] was like
an uncle.  he’d check in to see when my g2 driver’s test was and say he would
get his mom to light a holy candle for me.  he would check to see that i passed
and offer me a big congratulations when i did.  he loved to cook and was a good
cook and would often invite my brothers and i for dinner.  he also enjoyed
golfing and would book a tee off with my papa.  [bm] enjoyed visiting with papa
and the 4 of us would often attend men’s night at our local golf course. most
of the game and drive home we discussed techniques to improve our game and
joked about some of our poor shots.
ax recalled that bm accompanied them to the hunt
camp where he cooked.  he came to birthday parties and family gatherings.
ax discussed how he felt after he discovered the
cameras:
our family had
a hard time believing it was true.  i was shocked.  still after all this time,
it is hard to believe it really happened.  all i could think as i drove home
was “this isn’t real”, “this can’t be true”, “how could you do that?”  it is so
unbelievable that you wouldn’t even think of it.  we were as close to him as
some family and to do this is just shocking and makes you wonder what others
would do.  then i start to wonder, how long has he been doing this for?  he has
nephews that i know used to spend weekends and vacations with him.  has he been
doing this to them too?  my brothers worked there too, and my little brother.
the brother i should have been able to protect from this.
ax wrote that he is now paranoid about the presence
of cameras.  he showers with the lights off.  he avoids showering at other
people’s homes.  he has trust issues.  he stated, “i may work with people or
meet people, and they are nice and kind, but then the question crosses my mind,
could they do this?  can i trust them?  that’s all i can think about now when
someone is nice to me.”
ax stated that he was angry and frustrated.  he
feels ashamed.  he feels haunted by the thoughts of the videos and pictures and
“where they may have ended up.”
ax expressed the view the bm ruined his life and
he will have to “live with this forever.”
bx tackled the issue of bm’s sexuality in his
victim impact statement.  he wrote:
we have all
been raised in the valley to be kind, caring, helpful people with open minds
and to be accepting of everyone, regardless of their sexuality.
our parents
always told us to be aware and to tell them if anyone ever did anything to make
us feel uncomfortable in any way.  i always figured you were gay but it didn’t
really matter, i was only a kid and you were an adult, someone i trusted as a
friend.
bx reported being angry and “walking around in a
rage all the time.”  he stated that he has difficulty sleeping, he can’t trust
anyone and is suspicious of everyone he sees.  he is anxious when he travels,
goes to a concert or changes in the dressing room at the arena.   he reported
looking for hidden cameras everywhere.  bx reported having a hard time making
friends and keeping the friends he has.  he says that his friends have noticed
a change in him and he is afraid to tell them what has happened because it is
“very personal and embarrassing.”
the boys’ mother cx
wrote a victim impact
statement.  she reported that “[t]his whole experience has been detrimental to
our family.”  she stated that she was receiving counselling, had difficulty
focussing on work and day-to-day activities.
she described the breach of trust and the
heartbreak she and her husband experienced as parents:
as parents we
feel guilty for not knowing that [bm] was grooming our boys.  he had been to
our home for dinner, golfed with our sons and their grandfather, invited them
for dinner regularly and often paid them to help his own parents with chores
around the farm.  our family had treated him like a family friend.  he was a
senior citizen who needed help with work tasks and suffered from a vision
disability, very much like their own grandfather.  he used their kindness and
empathy to make them targets.
with respect to what she has observed in her
son, ax, cx stated:
[ax] has never
been the same since that night.  he has difficulty trusting and is very
suspicious of public spaces and they may have hidden cameras placed in
unsuspecting areas.  he has engaged in risky behaviour such as drinking, vaping
and smoking as ways to deal with the anxiety and depression that comes with
being a victim of a child predator.  the demands of school were difficult to
deal with and his attendance and commitment to classwork declined.  there were
and still are, many sleepless nights dealing with the anxiety and depression
that this incident has caused.
with respect to what she has observed in her
son, bx, cx noted that bx suffers from anxiety, depression, fear of strangers,
insomnia and low self esteem.  she added that he has panic attacks when he sees
bm and his mother.  she stated:
a once
positive, kind, friendly young man has turned very cynical, angry and
negative.  he carries around much internal angst.  he did try counselling
sessions from the phoenix centre but the counsellor was not a great fit and [bx]
has since stopped attending.  as an evolving teenage boy, he is much more risky
in his decisions about right and wrong…
cx noted that they have purchased a service
animal to help the boys at great expense.
the submissions of the crown
the crown sought a period of three to five years
in the penitentiary.
the crown submitted that the guilty plea was a
significant mitigating factor.  he also noted the fact that the accused had
lived an exemplary life and did not have a criminal record were highly
mitigating.
the crown highlighted the following aggravating
factors:
a)
this is a significant breach of trust.  the x family treated bm like
he was part of their family.  it was reciprocal.
b)
the offences involve a high degree of pre-meditation, planning and
was highly organized.
crown counsel submitted that a denunciatory
sentence was called for.  he stated that bm’s experience as a gay man must have
been extremely difficult for him and may explain the commission of the
offences, but did not diminish his moral blameworthiness.
crown counsel highlighted bx’s victim impact
statement, quoted above, in which he tacitly acknowledged that they “figured”
bm was gay and to them, it did not matter.
the crown also reminded me that in the “usual”
pornography case, the victims are often unknown.  in this case, “here they are”
and the victim impact they described is exactly what appellate courts have
instructed us to be wary of.
the submissions of defence
defence
counsel sought a sentence of between 18 and 30 months.  he stated that he was
not submitting that a conditional sentence was an appropriate disposition.  he
stated, “a good person has done a bad thing.”
defence
counsel pointed out the following mitigating factors:
a)
bm is primarily
responsible for his aged parents.  defence counsel asked that the matter be
adjourned a period of time to allow time for bm and his family to arrange their
affairs to accommodate going into custody.
b)
bm was very
successful in his career.
c)
bm entered an
early guilty plea and accepted responsibility.  he has significant insight and
remorse.
d)
bm is a low risk
to reoffend.
e)
bm is legally
blind and has other health concerns that need to be addressed which will make
his custodial sentence more difficult.
f)
bm did not
share the videos or photos with anyone.  i note that in reply, the crown
acknowledged that, based on the forensic investigation that was conducted, he
was unable to prove the aggravating factor of sharing.  defence counsel was
realistic about this, stating that bm accepted the victim impact where both
boys wondered who else had seen the videos and images.
defence
counsel advocated that although serious, the level of harm did not rise to the
same level as other cases.
bm’s address to the court
bm
took the opportunity to address me.
he
expressed his gratitude to his counsel and to the crown, who he described as
“very fair”.
i
am satisfied that he is extremely remorseful for what he has done.  he
indicated that his greatest concern was for the well-being of the boys and
their family.  he stated:
i broke not just a trust, but a
friendship and respect that they had.  that's something that is unforgiveable.
i took a potentially positive
relationship and future with them and took that away not only from them but
from myself….  of course, a lot of shame, and distress on my own family as well
because of these circumstances.
i know it rings hollow saying
how sorry i am and apologize through you to the family that were affected – are
affected. i have taken a life and destroyed it, certainly my own but also i
know it has affected them and there is nothing i can do or say that would
remove that impact on them…
analysis
the
criminal code
sentencing provisions
section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
a)
to denounce unlawful conduct in the harm done to victims or to the
community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
b)
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
and
f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.
section 718.01 sets out the following sentencing
objectives when dealing with offences against children:
when a court
imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a child under the
age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
establishes the fundamental principle of sentencing: “a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.”
section 718.2
of the
criminal code
sets
out “other sentencing principles”:
a
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence
that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race,
national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or
physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, or
on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence
that the offender involved a person under the age of 18 years in the commission
of the offence,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
(iii.2)
evidence
that the offence was committed against a person who, in the performance of
their duties and functions, was providing health services, including personal
care services,
(iv)
evidence
that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence
that the offence was committed while the offender was subject to a conditional
sentence order made under section 742.1 or released on parole, statutory
release or unescorted temporary absence under the
corrections and
conditional release act,
and
(vii)
evidence
that the commission of the offence had the effect of impeding another person
from obtaining health services, including personal care services,
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances;
(b)
a sentence should be similar to sentences
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances;
(c)
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty,
if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
sentencing is an individualized process
it is well developed in our law that sentencing
is a delicate and highly individualized process.  as my colleague justice march
has often said, “no two offenders are alike”.  see also
r. v. parranto
2021
scc 46
and
r. v. lacasse
2015 scc 64
.
discussion
of aggravating and mitigating factors
i generally agree with the submissions of both counsel
with respect to the various aggravating and mitigating factors that are present
in this case.
i make the following observations.
(1)
the mitigating effect of the guilty plea and the
expression of remorse
renfrew county is a busy court location.  bm’s
guilty plea has saved this court from multiple days of court time and it has
saved the complainants from having to testify.  for that we are grateful.
on the other hand, on the facts that i have
heard, it would seem to me that conviction was almost assured.  this has the
effect of lessening some of the mitigation.
bm expresses significant remorse for what he has
done and i accept that, notwithstanding his first thoughts when he was
committing these offences that he was not doing any harm, he now understands
the gravity of his offences.
(2)      the
accused has led an exemplary life and these offences are “out of character”
i acknowledge that bm has led an exemplary life,
that these offences are out of his character and, that he is generally, “a good
man.”
however, this case also illustrates the danger
with these offences.
they can be committed by anyone anywhere.
a man who should have known better, and who did
know better exploited innocent children.  children who looked up to him.
he exploited them for his sexual gratification.
sexual offences against children are committed
in private and out of the public eye.  they are committed by otherwise
pro-social and upstanding citizens.  this point was made well by justice
antonio of the alberta court of queen’s bench in
r. v. shrivastava
2019
abqb 663
where she noted that placing too much weight on “otherwise good
character” “can undermine the denunciative and deterrent functions of criminal
sentences” (at paragraph 87).
as chief justice tulloch recently noted in
r.
v. scott
2024 onca 608
at paragraph
159
, “many people who possess child
pornography are likely to be deterred by the prospect of strict sentences
because they often are otherwise law-abiding people of good character and
employment without prior convictions” (see also paragraph 172 of
scott
).
nonetheless, bm is entitled for some mitigation
to recognise that he is a first time offender. he is also entitled to some
mitigation to recognise that he is being sentenced later in life, and although
he is in relatively good health, any carceral sentence will be more difficult
for him than it would be for a younger man.
(3)      the
victim impact
both boys indicated that they feel that bm has
“ruined” their life.
their hurt is genuine.  they have suffered
immeasurably.  they have started to engage in risky behaviours, suffered in
school performance, and experienced significant anxiety.
cx and her husband are also anxious and they feel guilty for not
seeing the threat which bm posed and protecting their children from it.  cx and
her husband have lived every parent’s worst nightmare.
i hope that they all think carefully about whether they permit what
has happened here to ruin their lives.  bx and ax are simply too young to write
their lives off as a result of the horrible things that bm has done.  i hope
that they continue to engage in counselling to assist them to learn to cope
with what has happened to them.
in suggesting that they carefully consider the import of their words
and engage in counselling, i am in no way belittling the real victim impact
that they have suffered.
what this family has gone through will never be simply “fixed” by
changing their outlook or engaging in counselling.
they will never be the same.
we must all acknowledge that and accept that as true.  however, their
challenge must now be to learn to cope with these impacts so that they can live
and prosper despite them.  they are never going to simply forget and move on
from what happened; that is impossible.  but they must not let the long tough raging
storms obscure the bright stars on their horizons that represent their future.
in
r. v. friesen
2020 scc 9
, the supreme court of canada had
this to say about the effect of sexual offences against boys:
victimization
can be particularly shameful for boys because of social expectations that males
are supposed to appear tough (ontario, the cornwall public inquiry,
report
of the cornwall inquiry
,
phase 1: facts and findings
, vol. 1
(2009), at p. 28). embarrassment, humiliation, and homophobia form a
particularly toxic and stigmatizing combination for male child victims (
see
l. (d.o.)
, at p. 442, per l’heureux-dubé
j.;
r. v. viszlai
,
2015 bcca 495
,
333 c.c.c. (3d) 234
, at para.
23
).
for over 25 years, our courts have recognized the repugnant effect
that possession and production of child pornography has on victims.  in
r.
v. sharpe,
2001 scc 2
, at paragraph
92
, chief justice mclachlin discussed
the nature of production of child pornography this way:
the
link between the production of child pornography and harm to children is very
strong.  the abuse is broad in extent and devastating in impact.  the
child is traumatized by being used as a sexual object in the course of making
the pornography.  the child may be sexually abused and degraded.  the
trauma and violation of dignity may stay with the child as long as he or she
lives.  not infrequently, it initiates a downward spiral into the sex
trade.  even when it does not, the child must live in the years that
follow with the knowledge that the degrading photo or film may still exist, and
may at any moment be being watched and enjoyed by someone.
in this case, the crown is unable to prove that bm made the child
pornography that he produced available to others.  nonetheless, the victim
impact recognised by the supreme court of canada in
sharpe
is very
similar to what has taken place here.  regardless of the lack of evidence of
sharing or assurances from bm that he did not share the pornography with
others, the breach of trust in this case is so severe that bx, ax and their
family will always fear that someone is out there looking at the images and
videos.  while there is no evidence that this is the case, their fear is
understandable.
in
r. v. r.r.,
2022 oncj 407
, the accused surreptitiously
took a photo of the victim’s breasts in the course of sexually assaulting her.
the crown was unable to prove that the images were shared with anyone.  justice
jones stated at paragraph 57:
simply
knowing that such an image of one’s body exists, was taken without your consent,
and is under the control of another person who has already shown an intent to
harm you, is unquestionably an emotionally traumatic experience.
the damage is in some respects irreversible.
fortunately, bx and ax were not sexually assaulted by bm or others
in the pornography he made.
i am troubled that although bm now realises the impact of his
behaviour on his victims, he did not initially think that what he was doing
would cause any harm.
perhaps he thought this because he did not share the videos or
images with the wider world.
perhaps he thought this simply because he did not think he would get
caught.
he did not consider how significantly impacted the boys and their
parents would be by his breach of trust.
they allowed bm to become part of their family.
on a number of levels, therefore, the impact of bm’s offences on his
victims is extremely aggravating and his moral blameworthiness is high.  as
chief justice tulloch noted in
scott
, supra,
child pornography offenders
“…display a disturbing lack of empathy and compassion by continuing to collect
and view this material without considering the plight of the victims that it
depicts.”
(4)      bm’s
experience as a gay man
bm has never felt secure to freely embrace his sexual orientation
without fear of reprisal in his working life which involved high security
clearance, without risk of life-threatening and life-altering disease and most
importantly out of fear that the revelation that he was gay would devastate his
parents.
i have no doubt that his experience and anxiety is the shared
experience of many gay men in his age group.
today, homosexuality is much more widely accepted than it was when
bm was a younger man.  discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is
prohibited under human rights legislation.  homophobia is completely socially
unacceptable.  it is an affront to canadian values.
despite these advances, it is incredibly difficult and it takes a
lot of courage for same-sex people to “come out” about their sexual orientation.
they rightly fear the effect it will have on relationships with close family
members and friends.
unfortunately, we still live in an era where same-sex people can be ostracized
from their families, their friend groups and others in society just because of
their homosexuality.
i also agree with his observation that the experience of a gay man
would be even more difficult in small close-knit, traditional, socially
conservative rural communities like cormac and eganville.
i acknowledge that in keeping his sexual orientation private, bm thought
he was protecting himself and his family.
but none of that gives bm a license to do what he did.
in the best spirit of tolerant, kind canadians, the x family always
suspected that bm was gay, but continued to include him in their family.  as ax
stated in his victim impact statement, “it didn’t matter”.
the
quid pro quo
of that acceptance was the boys’ and their
family’s trust that bm would not violate them.
he profoundly breached that trust.
bm’s offences may also serve to engender the very discrimination
that bm was protecting himself and his family from.
bm’s offences may ultimately perpetuate unacceptable myths and
stereotypes about gay men as pedophiles who cannot be trusted around children.
thus, i agree with the crown’s submissions.  bm’s experience as a
gay man partially explains the commission of the offences.  it might also
explain his initial inability to empathize with the victims.  bm repressed his
sexuality and deprived himself of opportunities to form meaningful loving
relationships.  one cannot help but have sympathy for bm and the sacrifices he made
in order to stay “in the closet”.
but that sympathy only goes so far.  it does not excuse the highly
aggravating victim impact or the potential societal impact of these offences.  as
justice tulloch recently noted in
r. v. scott
, supra,
at paragraph
161
:
courts
must reject myths that minimize the degree of responsibility of those who
possess child pornography, and the wrongfulness and harmfulness of their
conduct:
friesen
, at paras.
43, 87
. these myths include that the conduct of those possessing
child pornography is harmless and victimless, accidental and passive, caused by
medical and psychiatric conditions, or an isolated occurrence: see, e.g., mary
graw leary, “the language of child sexual abuse and exploitation,” in hessick,
ed.,
refining child pornography law
109, at pp. 122-124;
o’donnell & milner, at pp. 194-195; smolen, at pp. 53‑55, 70-71.
these myths cannot conceal an all-too-obvious reality: people who possess child
pornography exploit real child victims callously, deliberately, and repeatedly.
failing to recognize this reality risks “undermin[ing] the credibility of the
criminal justice system in the eyes of victims, their families, caregivers, and
communities, and the public at large”:
friesen
, at para.
43
.
(5)      bm’s
risk to reoffend
bm is a low risk to reoffend.  that is clear from the section 21
report which does not reveal a diagnosis of pedophilia.
the law is clear that the primary sentencing principles in cases
like this are denunciation and deterrence.  i’ll discuss this in greater detail
below.
however, any carceral sentence that i will impose does not need to
be lengthier to allow significant time for bm to complete in-custody sexual
offending treatment.
given that he has been assessed to be a low risk to reoffend, he is
unlikely to receive intensive sexual behaviour offending treatment while in
custody.  this is because studies have shown that low risk offenders are
actually made worse by requiring them to engage in such treatment.
that is not to say that bm does not need treatment at all.
on the contrary, the evidence is clear that bm needs some treatment to
assist him with accepting who he is.
this is treatment that he can receive out of custody.
(6)
the size and nature of bm’s collection
i accept that the collection of child pornography here was very
small.  two real child victims were involved. this is, however, only one factor
and is not determinative of the sentence that should be imposed:
scott
,
supra,
at paragraph
167
.
the collection involves videos and still images.  videos are more
aggravating because they are more invasive and harmful violation of privacy of
the victims:
scott, supra.
fortunately, as i have pointed out, the images and videos do not
involve actual violence against the victims.  i recognize however, that this is
also not determinative and as i have pointed out, the victim impact in this
case is extremely aggravating.
(7)
duration, frequency, collaboration with other
offenders, planning, organization, sophistication and participation in child
pornography subculture
i accept that these offences took place on repeated occasions over
the date range set out in the informations.
i find that bm’s commission of these offences was planned and sophisticated.
the boys were invited over to his home to do some chores, share a meal and have
a shower.  towels and slippers were left out for them.  they were reminded to
turn on the diffuser, which activated the camera recording equipment.
fortunately, there is no evidence that bm collaborated with other
offenders or was a member of the child pornography subculture.
he made the child pornography for his own use.
the law
those who engage in sexual misconduct against children can expect
severe denunciatory and deterrent sentences:
r. v. friesen
2020 scc 9
.
child pornography cases are extremely serious
and are met with sentences that emphasize the sentencing
principles of denunciation (
criminal code
,
s. 718(a)) and general deterrence (
criminal code
, s. 718(b)):
r. v.
mccaw
2023 onca 8
at paragraph
19
.
in
r. v. scott
, supra,
chief justice tulloch described child
pornography as a “global cancer” (at paragraph 145).  possession of it is an
extreme invasion of the child’s privacy (paragraph 148), a “grave offence”
(paragraph 157) and a “callous crime” (paragraph 163). he noted that parliament
has directed courts to consider more severe punishment by legislating higher
maximum sentences and prioritizing denunciation and deterrence in
section
718.01
of the
criminal code
(paragraphs 158-159).
at paragraph 160, he stated:
courts must
follow parliament’s direction by placing children and the wrongs and harms that
people who possess child pornography inflict on them at the centre of the
sentencing process.  courts can give significant weight to the personal
circumstances and mitigating factors of people who possess child pornography
and to sentencing objectives such as rehabilitation:
friesen
,
at paras.
91-92, 104
.  but it is all too easy for those considerations, which focus on
the people being sentenced, to overshadow the wrongs and harms they inflict
because their victims are all to often invisible.
“deterrence is
an important consideration when sentencing an offender for the crime of
voyeurism. a clear message must be sent to the community that those who would
violate the sexual integrity and personal dignity of their victims by
surreptitiously taking photographs or videos of their bodies will pay a
significant price.”
r. v. r.r.
, supra,
at paragraph
58
.
as i have said
above, no two offenders are the same and no two offences are alike.  most, if
not all of the cases, i have found involve more serious conduct than the
offences before me.
in
r. v. r.b.
2014 onca 840
, the trial judge
sentenced the offender to four years in the penitentiary for four offences over
two incidents.  in the first incident, the offender surreptitiously recorded
his 13-year-old-niece in a bedroom while she was changing.  he pleaded guilty
to voyeurism and making child pornography and received a carceral sentence 18
months consisting of six months for the voyeurism and twelve months consecutive
for the offence of making child pornography.  in the second incident, the
offender pleaded guilty to luring and making child pornography after he lured a
16-year-old girl to his apartment and made 600 images of her posing nude. the
trial judge imposed consecutive sentences of 18 months for luring and 12 months
for making child pornography for a total sentence of four years.  the court of
appeal did not interfere with the trial judge’s decision, including the
decision to impose consecutive sentences.
in
r. v. r.k.
2015 onsc 2391
, the offender pleaded
guilty to various counts of possession of child pornography, making child
pornography and voyeurism.  the victims were his step-daughters, the friend of his
step-daughter and his partner.  the images were taken in the bathroom of their
residence.  the accused superimposed himself using
photoshop
in some of
the images to simulate engaging in sexual activity with the victims.  justice
blishen imposed a global sentence of 63 months.
in
r. v. r.k.
t.
2024 onsc 1897
, the offender was found guilty
after a trial of the offences of voyeurism, possession of child pornography,
making child pornography and distributing child pornography.  the offender surreptitiously
recorded his 15 to 16-year-old step-sister as she disrobed in the bathroom.
he then sent the videos to others who uploaded them to the internet.  the
victim learned about the violation from an anonymous person who had seen the
videos on the internet. justice campbell described the crimes this way at
paragraph 36:
in
the circumstances of the present case, in my view the main sentencing
principles must be deterrence and denunciation.  the criminal offences
committed by the accused were exceptionally serious.  the accused was a
member of the complainant’s family – he was her step-brother.  but, rather
than try to protect her and look out for her well-being, the accused used a
hidden camera to capture video recordings of her naked and partially naked body
while she used ostensibly private washroom facilities in homes where she was
entitled to feel safe and protected.  the accused planned and
surreptitiously made these hidden camera recordings of his step-sister (at
least once when she was still a child, being under 18 years of age) for his own
sexual pleasure as a voyeur, and for the sexual pleasure of at least one other
male, to whom he later distributed this “child pornography” he had secretly
manufactured.  this criminal conduct clearly, and grossly, violated the
complainant’s personal autonomy, dignity, privacy and sexual integrity.
the accused treated her not like his step-sister, but like a sex object – and
he blatantly exploited her over a period of time.  further, the steps
subsequently taken by the accused to pass along these “hidden camera” video
recordings of the naked complainant, predictably permitted their world-wide
distribution on the internet, and effectively revictimized the complainant on
countless occasions, and in virtual perpetuity.  these were cruel sexual
crimes.
justice campbell sentenced the accused to a global sentence of five
and a half years, comprised of three and a half years for voyeurism, three and
a half years concurrent for possession of child pornography, one year
consecutive for making child pornography and one year consecutive for
distributing child pornography.
there are also cases which are factually much more horrific, for
example, where a young child is intrusively sexually assaulted in order to make
child pornography which, as one might expect, even before
friesen
, are
crimes deserving of high single digit or double digit penitentiary sentences:
see
r. v. l.m.
2008 scc 31
,
r. v. d.g.f.
2010 onca 27
and
r.
v. j.s.
2018 onca 675
.
the
approach to sentencing that must be followed
having discussed the aggravating and mitigating factors and having
looked at the facts of decided cases, i must now situate bm’s crime on the
range of sentence.
i find that a global sentence of three years is a proportionate
response to the offences committed by bm.  it recognises the harm that he has
caused to the victims and the community by his crime.  it is a denunciative and
deterrent sentence.  i apportion the global sentence as follows:  two years for
the making child pornography offence and one year consecutive for the voyeurism
offence.
i have considered whether the mitigating factors are sufficient for
me to find that bm is deserving of a lesser sentence, or even a conditional
sentence in the community.
i note that defence counsel made it clear that he was not asking for
a conditional sentence.  although i am grateful for this admission, i must
still consider whether it is appropriate.
i have already found that incarceration of bm is not necessary to
protect the safety of the community.  bm is at a low risk to reoffend and he is
unlikely to receive treatment while incarcerated.  the question that i must now
decide is whether there are other compelling factors that would reduce the
sentence that i impose.
i am satisfied that there are not.
in
r. v. m.m.
2022 onca 441
, a case dealing with the
possession of child pornography in a situation that involves a breach of trust,
the court stated at paragraph 16:
conditional
sentences for sexual offences against children will only rarely be appropriate.
their availability must be limited to exceptional circumstances that render
incarceration inappropriate – for example, where it gives rise to a medical
hardship that could not adequately be addressed within the correctional
facility. it would not be appropriate to enumerate exceptional circumstances
here and we make no attempt to do so. suffice it to say that no exceptional
circumstances are present in this case.
i have set out bm’s personal circumstances at length.  he is in
relatively good health for his age.
in
r. v. faroughi
2024 onca 178
at paragraph
99
,
justice
zarnett discussed the ratio in
m.m.
as follows:
this
court has consistently reiterated post-
friesen
that
conditional sentences will rarely be appropriate for sexual offences against
children:
see
m.m.
,
at para.
16
;
b.m.
, at para.
2
. even so, in some exceptional circumstances, incarceration
will not be appropriate. for example, without creating any bright-line rules,
this court in
m.m.
suggested
that some offenders experiencing medical hardship that cannot be adequately
addressed within a correctional facility may fall within these circumstances:
at para. 16. as i will explain, i am satisfied that, given the appellant’s
immaturity and sexual inexperience at the time of the offence, the fact that
this was his first offence, his recent medical hardships, and his impressive
efforts in taking accountability for his actions and serving his community
post-sentence, a conditional sentence is available in these
circumstances.
in
r. v. pike
2024 onca 608
, chief justice tulloch stated at paragraphs
179 to 182.
….courts must decide whether a
conditional sentence is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles
of sentencing, especially the fundamental principle, proportionality. this test
requires considering not only personal circumstances and mitigating factors of
people who possess child pornography, but also the severe wrongs and harms that
they cause, their moral blameworthiness, and parliament’s prioritization of
deterrence and denunciation:
mccaw
, at paras.
27-29
;
r. v. m.m.
,
2022
onca 441
at paras.
15-16
. as this court held in
m.m.
, applying
this second step ordinarily results in custodial sentences because parliament
has prioritized denouncing and deterring the wrongs and harms that people who
possess child pornography cause real children: at paras. 15-16.
i must reconcile the
“exceptional circumstances” term that
m.m.
used to express this point with the supreme
court’s decisions in
r. v. proulx
,
2000 scc 5
, 1 s.c.r. 61,
and
parranto
.
at first glance,
m.m.
’s use of this term might seem contrary to these
cases, which respectively hold that appellate courts can neither create
presumptions that conditional sentences are inappropriate for specific offences
(
proulx
,
at paras.
80-83
), nor require exceptional circumstances to depart from a
range (
parranto
,
at para.
40
).
but in my respectful
view,
m.m.
did
not and could not have intended to depart from
proulx
by creating an
offence-specific presumption against conditional sentences. rather, it used the
“exceptional circumstances” term to convey that, since
proulx
,
parliament has increased maximum sentences and prioritized denunciation and
deterrence for sexual offences against children and, further, that the courts’
understanding of the harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has
deepened:
friesen
,
at paras.
109-110
; see
m.m.
, at paras.
13-15
. thus, while there is no
presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
proulx
changes
require more compelling personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the
absence of aggravating factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might
have been the case when
proulx
was decided more than two decades ago.
nor, in my view, did
m.m.
intend
to depart from
parranto
by
requiring exceptional circumstances to impose a conditional sentence.
rather,
m.m.
used
“exceptional circumstances” as shorthand for personal circumstances and
mitigating factors that are sufficiently compelling to make a conditional
sentence proportionate
, as in
r. v. padda
,
2019 bcca 351
, at para.
36
. not
only is there no closed list of such circumstances and factors (
m.m.
, at
para.
16
), but multiple seemingly non-exceptional factors taken together,
such as being a young first offender with family support who poses little risk
and takes responsibility for his actions, can collectively render a conditional
sentence proportionate:
r. v. faroughi
,
2024 onca 178
, 435 c.c.c. (3d) 1,
at para.
99
. this is consistent with
parranto
’s holding that
sentencing
must focus on proportionality, not pigeonholing cases into ill-defined
exceptional circumstance categories
: at para. 40; see
r. v. ellis
,
2022
bcca 278
, 417 c.c.c. (3d) 102, at para.
118
.  [emphasis mine]
see also, most recently,
r. v. al
2025 onca 9
.
in this case, i am not satisfied that there are sufficiently
compelling circumstances to reduce bm’s sentence to a period of less than a
global sentence of three years or a conditional sentence.
i therefore impose the following sentence:
a)
three years in the penitentiary.
b)
an order pursuant to
section 743.6
of the
criminal code
prohibiting
bm from having any contact or communication, directly or indirectly, by any
physical electronic or other means, with bx, ax, cx or any member of their
family, while bm is in custody.
c)
a lifetime order pursuant to section 161(a.1) prohibiting bm from
being within 150 meters of anyplace he knows bx, ax, cx or any member of their
family to live, work, go to school frequent or any place he knows them to be
except for the purpose of visiting his parent’s residence and travelling to and
from his parent’s residence without stopping.
d)
a lifetime order pursuant to section 161(b) prohibiting bm from
seeking, obtaining or continuing in any employment, whether or not that
employment is remunerated, or becoming a volunteer in a capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards a person under the age of 16
years.
e)
a lifetime order pursuant to section 161(c) prohibiting bm from having
contact or communication with any person under the age of 16 unless bm does so
under the supervision of that person’s parent or guardian and that person’s
parent or guardian is aware of bm’s offending behaviour except for contact
during the course of short commercial transactions or chance encounters in a
public place.
f)
an order, pursuant to section 487.051 for the
taking of bm’s dna.  the offence of making child pornography is a primarily
designated offence.  the offence of voyeurism is a secondarily designated
offence.  on the facts of this case, i make the order for both offences.
g)
an order, pursuant to sections 490.012(1), 490.013(3) and (4)
requiring bm to comply with the
sex offender information registration act
for
a period of 20 years.
i)
in making this order, i am satisfied that bm has
been convicted of offences involving two or more designated offences.  i am not,
however, satisfied that those offences demonstrate, or form part of a pattern
of behaviour which shows that bm presents an increased risk of reoffending or
committing a further crime of a sexual nature.
ii)
i make this finding based on the evidence before
me that bm is a low risk to reoffend, he accepts responsibility for his
offence, is remorseful for it and is unlikely to receive any treatment for
sexual offending while in custody.
iii)
i order that the duration of the requirements to
comply be set at 20 years on the basis that i find that the maximum sentence
for the offence of making child pornography is fourteen years and the maximum
sentence for the offence of voyeurism is five years.  the combination of sections
490.013(2)(b) and 490.013(4), therefore, mandate a twenty year reporting
period.
h)
pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code
,
i make an order
prohibiting bm from possessing any firearm, crossbow, prohibited weapon,
restricted weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition or explosive substance for a period of ten years.
i thank counsel for their helpful submissions.
released:  march
17, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson
these are not the complainants’ actual initials. i have used different initials
to preserve their anonymity.
these are not the actual initials of the mother’s name.  i have used these
initials to preserve the anonymity of the complainants