ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r. v. mootoo
, 2025 oncj
649
date:  2025·09·25
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
zoltan
mootoo
ruling on application for dismissal
submissions heard:
september 25, 2025.
delivered: september
25, 2025
mr. avik ghosh ........................................................................   counsel
for the federal crown
mr. david campos............................................................................
counsel for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
mr. mootoo was arrested in a residence,
steps away from a large-scale drug laboratory. the commercial pill press was in
operation producing pills when the police arrived. the officers confirmed that
nobody else was in the residence.
mr. mootoo is charged with:
•
1 – possession of a pill press s 7.1 cdsa
•
2 – ftc with probation – keep the peace s
733.1(1)
•
3 – ftc probation – reside condition s 733.1(1)
•
4 – careless storage of ammunition s 86(1)
•
5 – produce metonitazine s 7(1) cdsa
•
6 – possess metonitazine ftp of trafficking s
5(2) cdsa
•
7 – possess bromazolam ftp s 5(2) cdsa
•
8 – possess methylenedioxymethamphetamine ftp s
5(2) cdsa
the defendant applies at the close of the
crown’s case for a directed verdict of not guilty on all counts. the defence
submits that there is no evidence upon which a properly instructed trier of
fact could convict on any charge.
the crown submits that it’s important to
keep in mind the limit to the analysis at this stage. on the evidence heard, a trier
of fact engaging in a limited weighing of the circumstantial evidence to
determine reasonable inferences could reasonably infer guilt on each count.
the test at this stage is whether the crown
has shown that there is sufficient evidence upon which a reasonably instructed
trier of fact could find guilt on each count –
r v
sheppard,
1976 canlii 8 (scc)
, scj no 106. sufficient evidence in
this context is evidence that could reasonably lead to a finding of guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt –
r v charemski,
1998 canlii 819 (scc)
, scj no 23. where a case is based on circumstantial evidence,
the court must engage in a limited weighing of the evidence to determine
whether it is reasonably capable of supporting the inferences suggested by the
crown –
r v arcuri,
2001
scc 54
. this test is applied to the cumulative effect of the evidence as a
whole.
the cdsa charges
the defence submits that the evidence at its
highest establishes only that mr. mootoo was an occupant of the residence. mr.
mootoo made no statement or admission that he knew of the drug lab. there was a
tarp that covered the upper part of the doorway leading to that room. a trier
of fact could not reasonably infer that mr. mootoo knew of the drug lab and was
in control of that lab simply because he was the only person in the residence
when it was in operation.
the defence has referred to numerous cases, but
they place particular emphasis on the decision in
r
v turner,
2012 onca 570
as having a strong factual
similarity to this case. in
turner
,
the accused was found at the doorway of a room. his driver’s license
was on the floor of that room. there was no evidence that it was his bedroom or
that he knew of the gun that was concealed in the closet under folded clothing.
in that closet the police found passports belonging to two other people, both
of whom denied knowledge of the gun. the defence submits that
turner
and similar cases cited show that
mere presence in a residence is insufficient to establish knowledge and control
of hidden contents as a matter of law.
i agree with the defendant/applicant that there
is no “presumption of possession” that arises simply from occupation of a
residence –
r v choudhury,
2021 onca 560
at para
19
. however, all of these cases involve
circumstantial evidence. in that context the particular circumstances are
important:
•
this was not a simple residence as in the
turner
case where an illegal item was
found concealed in one room. this was a residence that contained a large-scale
drug production lab. the total value of drugs seized was $2,577,000.
•
the lab was in operation and the machinery was
producing pills when the officers arrived. the machinery made an audible noise.
the accused was the only person in the residence at the time the machine was in
operation.
•
only the top portion of the production room was
covered with a tarp taped to the doorway.
•
beyond the drug lab room, there was black
clothing dirty with powder along with a mask on the floor in the laundry room.
•
there were materials and equipment for drug
production stored throughout the main floor, not just in the tarp room.
•
p.c. barak testified that the accused walked out
of the garage into the hallway when they arrived. the garage contained large
commercial white buckets for liquid sugar, glycerin, black bottles used in the
lab for illicit codeine and drug production equipment in boxes.
there are other circumstances cited by the
defence that might point to the involvement of others in the enterprise, but at
this stage the court’s task is not to determine the best inference, or whether
other inferences might be available, but rather to determine on a limited
weighing whether there is sufficient evidence as discussed above upon which a
properly instructed trier of fact could reasonably find guilt on each of the
counts alleged.
a commercial pill press does not fill itself
with controlled substances and it cannot turn itself on. considering all of the
circumstances, i find a trier of fact could reasonably infer that entrance to a
working commercial level drug lab with over $2.5 million dollars worth of drugs
would likely be restricted to those involved in the operation or those
permitted by the operators. the fact that the pill press had been filled and was
in operation at the time when mr. mootoo was the only person in the residence
is strong circumstantial evidence from which a properly instructed trier of
fact could reasonably infer that he was a direct participant in the drug
production operation.
the ftc charges
it was agreed that mr. mootoo was subject to
a probation that included the two conditions referred to in counts 2 and 3 at
the time he was found in the residence.
the finding with respect to the cdsa charges
would provide a trier of fact with sufficient evidence to convict on count 2
alleging a breach of the term to “keep the peace”.
this was not just a drug lab. the evidence
shows the house was lived in. the master bedroom had bedding that had been
used. the bathrooms contained personal items and towels. there was food about
the house and food in the refrigerator.
mr. mootoo was found in the house at 9:30
p.m., a time that people are typically at their residence if they are not at
work or attending a social event. more importantly, there were many items found
in the house bearing mr. mootoo’s name including – a capital one visa card, a
puffer/inhaler, ocj court documents, parts invoice from bmw, toronto parking
overdue notice, a fixed camera speed offence notice, a red light camera notice,
an mot letter regarding license suspension, and an undertaking release from
halton.
i find that the crown has shown there is
sufficient evidence upon which a properly instructed trier of fact could
reasonably infer that mr. mootoo was residing at the markham location on the
date he was arrested there, contrary to a term of his probation.
conclusion
the application is dismissed.
delivered: september 25, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel