ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kikiantonis
, 2025 oncj 399
date:
2025 07 28
court
file no.:  toronto
24-48110427
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
john kikiantonis
charter
of rights and freedoms
application
sections
7, 8, 9, 10(b), and 12
appropriate
remedy
sections
24(1) and (2)
before
justice brock jones
heard
on may 26 – 30, june 2 – 3, 6, and july 15, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on july 28, 2025
s. andersen......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
d. paradkar.................................................................................... counsel
for j. kikiantonis
jones j.:
introduction
john kikiantonis was arrested on may 8, 2023, and charged with
four firearms-related offences. acting on information received from two
confidential sources (“cs”), toronto police service (“tps”) officers arrested
him in the backseat of a vehicle after he left his apartment building. he was
searched, and a loaded prohibited firearm was found in his possession along
with a digital scale containing white residue and some plastic baggies.
mr. paradkar filed an application alleging that mr. kikiantonis'
section
7
,
8
,
9
, and
12
charter
rights were violated during his arrest, search
incident to the arrest, and a series of strip searches that occurred at the
scene and while being processed at 11 division. mr. kikiantonis seeks a stay of
proceedings pursuant to
charter
section 24(1) or the exclusion of
evidence in accordance with
section 24(2)
. the crown opposes the application. the
trial proper and this
charter
motion were heard together.
the arrest and searches of mr. kikiantonis were warrantless, and
thus the crown bears the onus of establishing that they were lawful.
after mr. kikiantonis’ arrest, the police obtained a search
warrant for his apartment. the information to obtain (“ito”) the search warrant
was almost entirely based on conversations an officer had with two confidential
sources. to protect the identities of confidential sources while meeting its
disclosure obligations, the crown released redacted copies of the officers’
notes, the search warrant, and ito to the defence. one of the investigating officers,
dc sgroi, testified that he relied on the same confidential source information contained
in the ito when determining whether there were grounds to arrest mr. kikiantonis,
as he was privy to that information beforehand.
when an arrest is made based on a tip from a confidential source,
the reliability of the information provided to the investigating police force must
be carefully examined. the trial judge must assess whether the information was
compelling, credible, and corroborated by the police: see
r. v. debot
,
1989 canlii 13 (scc)
. the crown chose to invoke the step 6 procedure from
r.
v. garofoli,
1990 canlii 52 (scc)
, to permit me to consider the information
provided by the confidential sources that lay behind the redactions, in support
of its argument that the arrest was lawful. ms. andersen also offered a draft
judicial summary of the contents of the redacted material, in an attempt to
comply with the requirements established by the court of appeal in
r. v.
crevier,
2015 onca 619
.
following a hearing, i issued an unpublished ruling in which i determined
that the requirements of step 6 were not met. i would not consider the redacted
portions of the ito addressing confidential source information unless
additional details were disclosed to comply with
crevier
. i will not
comment further on that ruling in this reported decision, except to state that
a second judicial summary that the crown proposed was also deemed inadequate.
ms. andersen chose to continue with the prosecution. she
maintained that she could still demonstrate the lawfulness of the arrest and
search of mr. kikiantonis based on the totality of the admissible evidence that
remained, including the available portions of the ito that i could consider. therefore,
she relied on the information available to the court at step 5 of the
garofoli
process. mr. paradkar argued the
charter
motions on this basis.
on july 11, 2025, the ontario court of appeal released its
decision in
r. v. thompson,
2025 onca 500
. the court held that a
detainee should be provided with an opportunity to re-consult with counsel once
an officer has decided to authorize a strip-search. i alerted counsel to this
decision and its potential implications on july 15, 2025.  mr. paradkar sought
to amend his
charter
application accordingly to include an alleged
violation of mr. kikiantonis'
section 10(b)
charter
right.
if the
charter
applications are dismissed and the firearm
ruled admissible, mr. paradkar does not dispute that the crown will have proven
its case beyond a reasonable doubt on the merits. conversely, if the firearm is
ruled inadmissible, the crown cannot prove its case, and mr. kikiantonis must
be acquitted.
overview of the crown’s case
i.
dc james dunlop
dc dunlop has been employed by the tps for over
20 years and has been part of the guns and gangs unit since 2017. on may 8,
2023, he was part of the centralized shooting response team. he received a
request from dc mckenzie to assist with surveillance on a person of interest
(“poi”).
he arrived at 2655 bloor st. west at 11:48 p.m. the
poi – later determined to be mr. kikiantonis – had entered a motor vehicle,
believed to be an uber. after about two to three minutes of following the
vehicle, the takedown was ordered by another officer. the vehicle was pinned.
dc dunlop arrested mr. kikiantonis.
the grounds for the arrest were based on
information provided to him by other officers. an officer informed him that an
information package was associated with the investigation of mr. kikiantonis.
that package included details indicating that he had a firearm. in addition to
that information, before mr. kikiantonis entered the uber, dc sgroi communicated
over the radio that mr. kikiantonis was displaying “characteristics of being
armed with a firearm.”  dc dunlop had not personally made any such observations
however.
when he located mr. kikiantonis in the uber, dc dunlop
informed him that he was under arrest for possession of a firearm. he was
handcuffed. dc dunlop escorted him away from the vehicle and led him towards
the hood of one of the other police surveillance cars. he conducted a pat-down
search on mr. kikiantonis and felt something heavy in his jacket pocket. he
reached into the front right pocket of the jacket and discovered a black
handgun.
ii.
dc shawn mckenize
dc mckenzie played a limited role in the
investigation. at approximately 10:40 pm, he arrived at 2655 bloor st. west. at
11:07 p.m., dc storey informed him that an uber was parked on bloor st. west
outside the poi’s address. they planned to follow the vehicle and initiate a
takedown when it was safe to do so. after two or three minutes, other police
vehicles stopped the uber.
at this point, he noticed mr. kikiantonis standing
on the street. he removed a satchel from mr. kikiantonis’ shoulder. inside the
satchel, he found baggies he believed were for drugs, a digital scale with an
unknown white residue on it, airpods, and a pack of gum.
iii.
dc matthew vukovic
dc vukovic was also part of the centralized
shooting response team with guns and gangs. he had been an officer with the tps
since 2006. on may 8, 2023, he participated in surveillance on mr. kikiantonis.
his supervisor was dc mckenzie.
while conducting surveillance at 11:07 p.m., he
received information over the radio that mr. kikiantonis was exhibiting the
characteristics of an armed individual. det. storey instructed officers to
proceed with a takedown of the suspect if it was safe to do so.
dc vukovic was driving an unmarked police vehicle
and assisted in stopping the uber that was carrying mr. kikiantonis. he could
not recall which other officers were present at the scene of the arrest, aside
from dc mckenzie and dc dunlop. while he recalled that a field search of mr.
kikiantonis had occurred, his attention was diverted elsewhere at the time, and
he was unable to provide any details about it.
iv.
dc steve sgroi
dc sgroi was engaged in surveillance of mr. kikiantonis on may 8,
2023. he was positioned 20 to 100 yards away from the apartment building at
2655 bloor st. west.
his plan for the day was to continue the investigation. he did not intend to
arrest mr. kikiantonis.
at 11:07 pm, he observed mr. kikiantonis exit his building. he
had a black satchel slung across his torso, from his right shoulder to the left
side of his waist. initially, he suspected that mr. kikiantonis might have a
firearm in that satchel.
as he continued watching mr. kikiantonis, he noticed that he was
walking in an “unnatural” manner. his gait seemed “off.” he was pushing his
right hand against his right jacket pocket while also looking back over his
shoulder. he could not tell what, if anything, was in the jacket pocket or
underneath mr. kikiantonis’ clothing, nor did he see mr. kikiantonis place his
hand inside his jacket pocket.
he communicated over the radio that he believed mr. kikiantonis
possessed a firearm. his prior investigative experience helped form this
opinion. dc storey decided to order mr. kikiantonis’ arrest as a result.
v.
det. todd storey
detective storey has been an officer for 29 years. he oversaw the
street team involved in this investigation.
on may 8, 2023, he was present to continue surveillance of mr.
kikiantonis. he was positioned outside mr. kikiantonis’ address at 2655 bloor
st. west. he observed mr. kikiantonis leave the building and approach a waiting
uber. after dc sgroi expressed his belief that mr. kikiantonis was armed, he
ordered that a takedown would take place as soon as it was safe. he and his team
followed the uber for a short distance before stopping it near jane and dundas,
where mr. kikiantonis was removed from the vehicle and taken into custody.
det. storey observed mr. kikiantonis leaning over the hood of
another officer’s vehicle while dc dunlop conducted a pat-down search. he heard
dc dunlop yell “gun,” and then he was handed a black handgun. he verified that the
firearm was safe and then placed it in a secure lockbox. he instructed other
officers to obtain a search warrant for mr. kikiantonis’ address and arranged
for a transport vehicle to take him to 11 division.
he explained that he trusted dc sgroi’s judgment, having known
and worked with him for many years. when dc sgroi stated that he believed mr.
kikiantonis had a gun, that was sufficient for him to conclude there were
adequate grounds to order the arrest.
vi.
dc michael moorcroft
dc moorcroft is a 20-year veteran with the tps.
on may 8, 2023, he was present for the arrest of mr. kikiantonis outside of
3425 dundas street west in toronto. other officers informed det. moorcroft that
after the arrest, mr. kikiantonis was found in possession of a digital scale
with white residue, plastic baggies, $500 in cash, and a handgun. these items
are all commonly associated with drug dealing based on his experience.
before the arrest, dc moorcroft participated in
a briefing regarding the investigation. in that briefing, he learned mr.
kikiantonis was known to sell drugs at a local bar.
he remained with mr. kikiantonis at the location
of his arrest for 18 minutes. he then accompanied mr. kikiantonis to 11
division, where he was frisked and strip-searched. throughout this process, mr.
kikiantonis was calm and cooperative. he did not observe mr. kikiantonis
engaging in any behaviour that indicated he was attempting to hide or conceal
any drugs.
nevertheless, drug dealers, he testified, often
conceal drugs on their person, such as in their underwear or buttocks.
therefore, he requested a strip search of mr. kikiantonis from sgt. raspberry
at 11 division. his primary concern was the safety of mr. kikiantonis and
anyone he might encounter while in custody. if someone consumed drugs, it could
jeopardize their health.
the strip search occurred in a private room. it
was “by the book.” mr. kikiantonis was never fully naked. nothing was located.
in cross-examination, detr. moorcroft explained
that he had been trained in strip searches. he understood that he required
“case-specific” information to justify a strip search. he agreed that he had a
duty to document both the grounds for the search and the manner in which it was
conducted. yet, his notes, admittedly, lacked any details regarding how the
search was performed. he thought the search was being audio recorded, but it was
the responsibility of the booking officer to ensure that was done, and he did
not independently verify that it occurred.
vii.
testimony of det. jason raspberry
detective raspberry has been employed by the tps since 2007. on
may 9, 2023, he was the acting staff sergeant at 11 division. he was tasked
with being the booking officer for the evening.
mr. kikiantonis was paraded before him. a video of this process
was shown and filed as an exhibit. the officer who presented him, dc moorcroft,
requested a level 3 (strip) search. he articulated his reasons on the video,
which i reproduce here, alongside sgt. raspberry’s response:
officer moorcroft:
at
this time, i’m requesting a level three, or i guess a strip search now… at the
time of the arrest, he was found in possession of drug packaging, a scale with
powder residue and the powder residue was also located inside a fanny pack that
held all that property. he was found in possession of a loaded firearm in his
jacket pocket, and he was also known to deal drugs out of a local bar.
so, on that grounds, i’m
requesting a level three or strip search.
…
sgt. raspberry:
what the
officer’s requested is what’s called a strip search…
i understand there was
packaging that appeared to have drug residue, a scale, and a satchel that had
some residue in it as well. ok, i’m going to read you a notice i have to read
here. i have reasonable and probable grounds to conduct a strip search. the
search will be conducted in a private area, and not video recorded. however, the
area will be audio recorded…
additionally, the booking video reveals that while sgt. raspberry
provided mr. kikiantonis with the right to speak to counsel
before
he
was informed he would be strip-searched, he was not read his right to consult
with counsel anew
after
that decision was made and articulated to him.
in cross-examination, det. raspberry agreed that he based his
decision to authorize a strip search on the items located on mr. kikiantonis
during his arrest, the information that he was allegedly dealing drugs, and his
experience as an officer in drug investigations. he explained that while the
arresting officers found “all the trapping of drugs" during their initial
search of mr. kikiantonis, they did not find “actual drugs,” which heightened
his concern that mr. kikiantonis may have hidden some on his body.
he agreed that his training taught him that an individualized
assessment of the accused and the charges he was facing was necessary to
authorize a strip search. he understood the importance of creating a proper
record of the grounds for the search and the manner in which it was executed.
he believed the search would be audio recorded. on the audio record, one would
expect to hear when the detainee was removing and replacing certain items of
clothing. however, he did not know if mr. kikiantonis’ search was audio
recorded, as he never tested the audio recording equipment.
det. raspberry did not dispute that a strip search is highly
intrusive and demeaning. it should only be conducted in private and never
videotaped. mr. paradkar questioned him about written tps policies regarding
searches, and he acknowledged that there were significant differences between
“frisk” and “strip” searches. these differences include that a frisk search
does not involve the removal of underwear or the inspection of genitalia or
anal areas.
viii.
special constable peter walker
special constable walker has been an officer for 25 years. he was
working at 11 division on may 8, 2023.
he performed both a frisk search and a strip search of mr.
kikiantonis. the frisk search was recorded on the booking hall video, which was
submitted as an exhibit. he did not dispute the video’s accuracy. after
completing the frisk search, he and dc moorcroft escorted mr. kikiantonis into
a small room for the strip search. upon entering the room, he pushed a button
intended to activate the audio recording equipment. however, he was unfamiliar
with how the equipment functioned and had not received training on its
technical aspects.
he acknowledged that his memo book was lacking any notes
regarding the manner of the search. his practice was to only document something
if it were out of the ordinary, such as a medical complaint. if a search
proceeded normally and nothing was found, there was no need to keep notes in
his mind. he did complete a level 3 template form, but conceded in
cross-examination that this form does not capture details of how the search was
conducted. instead, it focused on the time of the search, the authorization received
to proceed, and whether anything was found.
he was not familiar with
r. v. golden
. although he was
aware of the police policies concerning strip searches, he had not read them in
detail. he concurred with mr. paradkar that the policies require an officer to
document complete information of all searches in a memo book. he acknowledged
that his notes contained “no details” of the strip search.
during the “frisk search”, between 11:18 and 11:26 on the booking
hall video, he can be seen searching the torso of mr. kikiantonis. he then
proceeds to pull back mr. kikiantonis’ jeans and look down his pants. mr.
paradkar suggested that he was pulling back mr. kikiantonis’ underwear as well
and looking into his buttocks. the officer did not dispute this
characterization. he agreed that his head was positioned to stare down into mr.
kikiantonis’ pants. he described his frisk search approach as “thorough.”
ix.
dc andrew pak
dc pak was responsible for the audiovisual
recordings as part of the disclosure process. he did not request the audio
recording of the strip search at 11 division until august 22, 2024, when he
received an email request from ms. anderesen. he learned that 11 division
upgraded its audio-video system and all existing recordings were purged on or
about may 10, 2024, a year after mr. kikiantonis’ arrest.
x.
tps policy – “search of persons” – issued 2024.09.17
while this policy was not in place at the time of mr.
kikiantonis’ arrest and detention, the officers each agreed that the policy’s
definitions respecting “frisk” and “strip” searches accurately represented
their understanding of those distinctions as of may 8, 2023. those definitions
are found on page 13 (my emphasis added):
definition of frisk search
(formerly level 2)
“this is used generally for
search incident to arrest and means a more thorough search that may include
emptying and searching pockets as well as removal of clothing,
which does
not expose a person’s undergarments, or the areas of the body normally covered
by undergarments
. the removal of clothing such as belts, footwear, socks,
shoes, sweaters, extra layers of clothing, or the shit of a male would all be
included in a frisk search. a frisk search may be commenced in the field and
concluded at the station.
definition of strip search
(formerly level 3)
r v golden,
2001 scc 83
established that which constitutes a strip search and what types of
circumstances may justify one. a strip search includes all steps in protective
and frisk searches as well as a thorough search of a person’s clothing and
non-physical search of the body. that will often require
removal or
rearrangement of some, or all, of the person’s clothing to permit a visual
inspection of a person’s private areas: namely the genitals, buttocks,
breasts or chest, body cavity,
and/or undergarments
; the mouth was
excluded from this definition despite being a bodily cavity.
the document also instructs that officers “shall not conduct
strip searches in any location other than a private area of a secure police
facility” (see page 8).
defence evidence
i.
affidavit and testimony of mr. kikiantonis
mr. kikiantonis filed an affidavit in support of his claim that
his rights were violated during the strip searches. he was arrested at gunpoint
by tps officers when he was seated in the back of an uber. the officers pulled
him out of the vehicle and slammed him on the hood of the car. they handcuffed
him. they located a firearm in his front right jacket pocket.
a police officer then brought him onto the sidewalk, in public,
and searched him. during this search, an officer pulled back his jeans and
underwear while looking down his pants. the officer was able to view his bare
buttocks and genitals. he identified the officer responsible as dc dunlop.
at 11 division, he described special constable walker pulling his
jeans and underwear back, while the officer looked down at his lower body. this
incident was captured on video in the booking hall. in the room designated for
the formal strip search, he described in detail how he had to remove pieces of
his clothing and adjust his body to comply with the officers’ demands.
mr. kikiantonis felt disgusted, embarrassed and ashamed by each
of these searches. he described it as a degrading experience that cost him his
dignity.
positions of the parties
mr. paradkar submits that the investigating officers lacked
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest his client and thus violated his
section 8
and
9
charter
rights. he cited
r. v. chehil,
2013 scc
49
, in which the supreme court clarified the distinction between reasonable
suspicion and reasonable and probable grounds. at most, the officers had a
reasonable suspicion that mr. kikiantonis might have been engaged in criminal
activity. the information available to them fell far short of establishing reasonable
and probable grounds.
in particular, he points to dc sgroi admitting in
cross-examination that “absent ci information”, he did not have a “strong
belief” that mr. kikiantonis possessed a firearm, but instead accepted it was a
“possibility.” dc sgroi’s evidence was presented as the foundation of the justification
for his client’s arrest.  dc sgroi’s observations were brief, and from a
considerable distance. he agreed that he did not see mr. kikiantonis put his
hand inside his jacket to hold an item, but was merely holding his hand against
his jacket. nor did he see anything akin to the outline of a firearm anywhere
on mr. kikiantonis’ clothing. he came to a highly speculative conclusion that mr.
kikiantonis had a gun and then broadcast that belief to the other officers which
led to his client’s arrest. his subjective determination was hastily made and,
therefore, not reliable.
regarding the cs information lawfully available for consideration
on this application, mr. paradkar submits that, as a result of my earlier
ruling, it is entitled to minimal weight. the investigating team had at most
vague, uncorroborated information that mr. kikiantonis had a firearm at some
unknown date in the past. there were no specific details to support that claim.
the reliability of the sources was unclear. and little to no independent
evidence existed to support the cs’ assertions, beyond dc sgroi’s untrustworthy
observations on the day of mr. kikiantonis’ arrest.
mr. paradkar further submits that det. storrey testified he did
not observe any suspicious behaviour on behalf of mr. kikiantonis prior to his
arrest, which contradicts dc sgroi’s testimony. he was also able to make direct
observations of mr. kikiantonis. as the lead investigator, he had a heightened
responsibility to ensure sufficient grounds existed before an arrest was
authorized. he seemed to place blind faith in dc sgroi’s subjective assessment
without independently reviewing and considering the totality of the information
available to him.
if i agree with his position, the officers would have made an
unlawful arrest, and the search conducted incident to that arrest would also
have been unlawful, violating his client’s
section 8
and
9
charter
rights.
following the arrest, mr. paradkar argued that his client was
unlawfully strip-searched multiple times that evening. each one was an
independent violation of his client’s rights under
sections 7
and
8
of the
charter
.
first, he was subject to a field strip search that was unjustified. second,
officer raspberry lacked the necessary grounds to order a formal strip search
at 11 division. third, special constable walker converted a frisk search into a
strip search in the hallway of 11 division. as well, the lack of a proper
record associated with these strip searches (in particular, the formal strip
search at 11 division) violated his client’s section 8 rights. i may also find
violations of
section 12
of the
charter
as a result of this conduct,
subject to my findings of fact.
while the field strip search and the excessive frisk search
conducted at 11 division did not involve the complete removal of mr.
kikiantonis’ clothing, that is not necessary for the searches to be considered
strip searches. the definition of strip search established in
golden
is
broad enough to include an officer peering into an accused person’s
undergarments and viewing their genitals or buttocks.
relying on
thompson
,
mr. paradkar submits that mr.
kikiantonis should have been provided with an opportunity to re-consult with
counsel after sgt. raspberry authorized a strip search at 11 division. that was
denied to mr. kikiantonis, which constitutes a violation of
section 10(b)
of
the
charter
.
as a remedy, he requests that the evidence be excluded under
section 24(2)
of the
charter
or that i issue a stay of proceedings
pursuant to
section 24(1)
. the
charter
violations, he submits, are particularly
serious because they involved systemic failures by experienced officers. the serious
nature of these violations, combined with their impact on his client’s
charter
-protected
interests, at a minimum, demands exclusion of the evidence. in addition, depending
on my findings, he urges me to conclude that no other remedy can address the
prejudice resulting from the sum total of these
charter
breaches, other
than a stay of proceedings.
ms. andersen argues that the officers collectively had reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest mr. kikiantonis. in particular, i should accept
the testimony of dc sgroi. he was an experienced and reliable officer who had
the best vantage point of mr. kikiantonis outside his apartment building. he
observed mr. kikiantonis walking in a manner that, based on his extensive
experience investigating firearm-related offences, indicated to him that mr.
kikiantonis possessed a firearm at that time. it was a reasonable conclusion
for him to reach, and he explained it clearly during his testimony.
each of the officers was entitled to rely on the information
provided by the other officers involved in the investigation. ms. andersen
described them as a “seasoned team” that regularly handles these types of
offences. she argued they had an enhanced awareness of what body movements,
mannerisms, and scenarios suggest a reasonable belief that a suspect has a
firearm.
regarding the strip searches, ms. andersen argues that mr.
kikiantonis was not a credible witness and urges the rejection of his testimony
about the alleged field strip search. she recommends accepting the accounts of
all police officers present, particularly dc dunlop's. consequently, i should
determine that this search did not take place. although a formal strip search
at 11 division was authorized by sgt. raspberry, it was a lawful decision as
the officer had reasonable and probable grounds. sgt. raspberry was justified
in relying on the digital scales and baggies found on mr. kikiantonis at the
time of his arrest, as well as the information that he was involved in drug
trafficking at a local bar, to support this decision.
ms. andersen further argues that a review of the video of the
strip search at 11 division should lead me to conclude that special constable
walker did not cross any boundaries during his frisk search, including the act
of pulling back his pants and peering into the individual's genital area during
a strip search. i should dismiss this part of the defence application
accordingly.
she further argues that there was no breach of
section 10(b)
of
the
charter
. sgt. raspberry offered mr. kikiantonis the opportunity to
consult with counsel just before the decision to conduct a strip search was
made. he explicitly refused, asking, “what’s the point?” there is no reason to
believe his response would have been any different if he had been informed of
his right to counsel a moment later, after being told a strip search was
imminent. he had already dismissed, in his mind, the value of consulting with
counsel at that early stage of the process.
i should dispense with the
charter
applications
accordingly. if i find any breaches, she argues that the loaded firearm should
be considered admissible under the
grant
test associated with
section
24(2)
of the
charter
. the officers found a loaded firearm on a man
involved in drug dealing who was heading to an unknown destination. they needed
to act quickly to protect public safety. this should weigh heavily, if not
overwhelmingly, in favour of including the evidence.
reasonable and probable grounds for an arrest
section 495(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
allows a peace
officer to arrest a person without a warrant if, on reasonable grounds, they
believe the person has committed or is about to commit an indictable offence.
in
r. v. beaver
,
2022 scc 54
, at para.
72
, the supreme
court of canada summarized the essential legal principles governing warrantless
arrests. i reproduce that summary here, with the citations removed for brevity:
1.
a warrantless
arrest requires subjective and objective grounds to arrest. the arresting
officer must subjectively have reasonable and probable grounds for the arrest,
and those grounds must be justifiable from an objective viewpoint.
2.
in assessing the
subjective grounds for arrest, the question is whether the arresting officer
honestly believed that the suspect committed the offence. subjective grounds
for arrest are often established through the police officer’s testimony. this
requires the trial judge to evaluate the officer’s credibility…
3.
the arresting
officer’s subjective grounds for arrest must be justifiable from an objective
viewpoint. this objective assessment is based on the totality of the
circumstances known to the officer at the time of the arrest, including the
dynamics of the situation, as seen from the perspective of a reasonable person
with comparable knowledge, training, and experience as the arresting officer.
4.
evidence based
on the arresting officer’s training and experience should not be uncritically
accepted, but neither should it be approached with “undue scepticism”… although
the analysis is conducted from the perspective of a reasonable person “standing
in the shoes of the [arresting] officer”, deference is not necessarily owed to
their view of the circumstances because of their training or experience... the
arresting officer’s grounds for arrest must be more than a “hunc[h] or
intuition”.
5.
in evaluating
the objective grounds to arrest, courts must recognize that, “[o]ften, the
officer’s decision to arrest must be made quickly in volatile and rapidly
changing situations. judicial reflection is not a luxury the officer can
afford. the officer must make his or her decision based on available
information which is often less than exact or complete”... courts must also
remember that “[d]etermining whether sufficient grounds exist to justify an
exercise of police powers is not a ‘scientific or metaphysical exercise’, but
one that calls for the application of ‘[c]ommon sense, flexibility, and
practical everyday experience’”…
6.
“reasonable and
probable grounds” is a higher standard than “reasonable suspicion”. reasonable
suspicion requires a reasonable possibility of crime, while reasonable and
probable grounds requires a reasonable probability of crime … at the same time,
police do not require a prima facie case for conviction before making an
arrest. nor do the police need to establish that the offence was committed on a
balance of probabilities. instead, the reasonable and probable grounds standard
requires “a reasonable belief that an individual is connected to the offence”…
a reasonable belief exists when “there is an objective basis for the belief
which is based on compelling and credible information”… the police are also not
required to undertake further investigation to seek exculpatory facts or to
rule out possible innocent explanations for the events before making an arrest.
7.
the police
cannot rely on evidence discovered after the arrest to justify the subjective
or objective grounds for arrest.
8.
when a police
officer orders another officer to make an arrest, the police officer who
directed the arrest must have had reasonable and probable grounds. it is
immaterial whether the officer who makes the arrest personally had reasonable
and probable grounds.
a search incident to arrest may be conducted according to common
law if (i) “the individual searched has been lawfully arrested”; (ii) “the
search is truly incidental to the arrest in the sense that it is for a valid
law enforcement purpose connected to the arrest”; and (iii) “the search is
conducted reasonably”: see
r. v. sureskumar
,
2023 onca 705
, at para.
10
.
mr. paradkar does not dispute that the officers were entitled to search his
client if the arrest was lawful.
based on the redacted material presented to the court under step
5 of the
garofoli
application, i conclude the following information from
the two confidential sources may be considered on the
charter
application:
•
a person of interest, subsequently determined to be mr.
kikiantonis by the police, was identified by both sources;
•
one of the sources was tested;
•
the other was untested;
•
the tested source provided information that the person identified
was known to sell drugs; and
•
both sources provided information that the person had been
witnessed in possession of a gun.
the further details, if any, provided by the confidential sources
surrounding mr. kikiantonis’ alleged possession of a firearm may not be
considered. even without these additional details, ms. andersen argued that the
investigating officers could still have formed reasonable and probable grounds
to believe that mr. kikiantonis would have had a firearm the day he was
arrested. since two sources had identified him as having one at some unknown
date in the past, an inference could be drawn that he was still in possession
of the firearm on the day of the investigation.
before analyzing this argument further, i emphasize that dc sgroi
and det. storrey agreed that they were not preparing to arrest mr. kikiantonis
when they first observed him on may 8, 2023. even armed with all the information
provided by the confidential sources, some of which i may no longer consider,
the officers did not subjectively believe they had reasonable and probable
grounds to arrest mr. kikiantonis. they required additional information.
in
r. v. herta
,
2018 onca 927
, the ontario court of appeal
held that trial judges can draw an inference that those who possess guns may
have them for long periods of time. but that inference drawing is subject to significant
constraints. the court wrote at para. 48 (my emphasis added):
relying upon delchev, the
respondent emphasizes that the fact that the ci said that he saw callahan with
the gun was enough, standing on its own, to pass the compelling threshold in
debot and justify the search. i agree with the sentiment expressed in delchev,
at paras. 73-75, that an inference can be drawn that "criminals who are
illegally in possession of guns" may have them for long periods of time.
i do not read delchev as saying, though, that the fact that a ci has seen
someone with a gun at some point in the past, means that a search warrant can
necessarily issue for any place attended by that person
in the
future
.
in
herta
, the investigating officers relied on information
obtained from a confidential source. the source stated that the person of
interest had a gun and that he “knew” that the person of interest would “not be
anywhere without the gun”: see para. 10. nothing explained why the source
believed that the person of interest would not be without the gun; rather, it
was a conclusory statement without any foundation. as a result of this
information, a search warrant was executed at the appellant’s home. the court
of appeal found that the redacted ito did not contain sufficient grounds to
support the search warrant. the evidence was excluded, and the appellant was
acquitted.
of importance, the crown did not resort to step 6 in
herta
during the garofoli hearing. it relied solely on the information available at
step 5.
similarly, in
r. v. hibbert
,
2019 onsc 3219
, police officers
located a loaded gun behind the stereo of the accused’s motor vehicle while
executing a search warrant. the warrant contained information provided by a
confidential source. the crown did not rely upon that information, pursuant to
step five of the
garofoli
application process. the crown argued that
based on the unredacted ito, the issuing justice could have issued the
warrants.
part of that information included credible and reliable evidence
that mr. hibbert was involved in a shooting three months earlier: see para. 52.
however, justice dennison held it was not reasonable to infer that the gun
would be found more than three months after the shooting in the accused’s
possession in the absence of stronger evidence: see paras. 79-81. the warrant
should not have been issued.
the crown faces an even greater challenge in this case. the
evidence that i may lawfully consider in support of mr. kikiantonis’ arrest provides
no meaningful temporal connection to the confidential source information. i
cannot ascertain the currency of that information. nor can i determine whether
it was compelling. the reliability of the first source is limited to knowing
that they were a “tested” source, but no basis for this claim was provided. the
officers were aware if the sources had a criminal record, outstanding charges,
or had been offered consideration, but nothing more. the details of all those
factors remain redacted. the second source was entirely untested.
a blanket accusation that someone has a firearm without any additional
details is not enough to justify a warrantless arrest anywhere and at any time.
the crown relies on the independent observations of dc sgroi to
corroborate certain aspects of the information provided in the tips. when mr.
kikiantonis was located, dc sgroi believed he exhibited signs of being armed
based on his training and experience. this strengthens the foundation for
reasonable and probable grounds, according to ms. andersen. i agree that this
is a pertinent factor to consider, as discussed in
beaver
and the
authorities cited therein, such as
chehil
and
mackenzie
. however,
it should not be given undue weight without careful consideration.
in
r. v. dene
,
2010 onca 796
, the court of appeal held
that “posture and body movements” which indicated someone “could be carrying
weapons or drugs” may lawfully be considered in the context of justifying an
investigative detention: see para. 4. similarly, in
r. v. plummer,
2011
onca 350
, the appellant’s “reaction to seeing the police” and his movements
that were “consistent with attempting to conceal something” were held to be relevant:
see para. 23. a “blading” movement, which involves turning a side of the body
away from another person (in this case, an officer who indicated he was going
to conduct a pat-down search) was considered in
r. v. amofa
,
2011 onca
368
, at para.
9
. these factors may also be considered by a court when determining
if there was a lawful basis for an arrest. another example is
r. v. muller
,
2014 onca 780
, where an officer’s visual observation of a suspect’s body
movements formed part of the evidence required to establish reasonable and
probable grounds: see para. 42. each case, of course, is fact-specific.
an interesting analogous case to this one is
r. v. williams
,
2013 onca 772
. a police officer at 23 division in toronto received an anonymous
tip indicating that a suspect matching the appellant’s description had a
firearm while walking south near a specific address. within minutes,
plainclothes officers arrived at the location. two police officers approached
the appellant and identified themselves. one asked him if he was armed. the
appellant “bladed” his body by turning to his side, and one of the officers
noticed he made a movement towards the area of his waist: see paras. 7-14.
the court of appeal held that the appellant’s detention was
lawful. while a detention based on an anonymous tip alone could not provide
sufficient grounds, “the combination of the anonymous tip and what occurred
when the appellant encountered the police was capable of supporting a
reasonable belief that the appellant might be connected to a gun crime as
reported by the anonymous caller”: para. 27. the search that followed, based on
this lawful detention, did not violate the
charter
either. i note,
however, that the tip in
williams
was provided only minutes before the
officers located the appellant, and they were able to make direct observations
of him prior to forming their grounds.
importantly, by themselves, even when viewed through the lens of
officer experience, observations that a suspect’s body movements are suspicious
are typically inadequate to justify either an arrest or an investigative
detention. in
r. v. mohamed aden
,
2019 onsc 4890
, the accused was found
in the company of another man who was the target of a police investigation. an
officer observed mr. aden repeatedly touch his waistband and the front of his
hoodie while standing outside a mcdonald’s restaurant. based on this
observation, the officer believed mr. aden possessed a firearm. the officer
alerted his team, and mr. aden was detained. a firearm was discovered near mr.
aden. justice forestell held that this was insufficient to form a lawful basis
for either an arrest or a detention: see para. 8.
the case for the crown regarding the officers’ grounds for
arresting mr. kikiantonis is considerably weaker than in these other reported decisions
where a detention or arrest was deemed lawful. in addition to the concerns i
have already identified, the evidence from the two confidential sources was not
corroborated in a meaningful manner. the surveillance of mr. kikiantonis did
not reveal anything notable. finding him outside his residence, not engaged in any
criminal activity, confirmed nothing of significance that was provided by the
confidential sources. he was not seen involved in any behaviour consistent with
drug dealing, nor was he observed possessing a firearm. this falls far short of
the
debot
criteria.
it was only when dc sgroi saw mr. kikiantonis with a satchel that
he believed he might have a firearm. based on his prior experience, he thought
that suspects often kept firearms in satchels. of course, it should go without
saying that one can use a satchel for entirely lawful purposes as well. dc
sgroi’s attention shifted when mr. kikiantonis walked “unnaturally” and used
his right hand to push his right jacket pocket against his body constantly.
this caused dc sgroi to conclude that mr. kikiantonis had a firearm in his
jacket instead.
i do not find this compelling. i emphasize that when the crown
cites officer experience and training to justify detaining or arresting an
individual, certain principles must be taken into consideration. an officer’s suspicion
of criminal behaviour must be based on specific, verifiable observations. and the
court must still “be prepared to look carefully at what is held out to be
experience or training”, especially when that forms the tipping-point for state
action, lest the integrity of our constitutional standards be compromised: see
r.
v. yeh
,
2009 skca 112
, at para.
53
.
dc sgroi testified that his training included a course on the
characteristics of an armed person in 2008 and stated that “not much had
changed” since then. he had furthermore taken part in hundreds of arrests of
suspects for illegal firearm possession. through that professional experience
and conversations he’s had with informants about gun and drug culture, he has
come to believe that someone walking unnaturally can often indicate they are
carrying a firearm. however, in cross-examination, he conceded that his
observations, on their own, did not support a “strong” belief that mr.
kikiantonis had a firearm, but only suggested a “possibility.”
considering the entirety of the evidence available to dc sgroi, even
when viewed through the lens of his training and experience, this still fell
short of the standard required for a lawful arrest. at most, mr. kikiantonis
acted somewhat unusually for a few seconds while pressing his hand against his
jacket pocket. i note that det. storey, who was also observing mr. kikiantonis
as he approached the uber, noticed “nothing out of the ordinary” about how he
walked. dc sgroi’s observations were thus highly subjective and contradicted by
det. storey’s account of the same events. i conclude that dc sgroi saw what he
wanted to see, having been predisposed to believe that a firearm would be found
on mr. kikiantonis due to his prior knowledge of the confidential source material.
the caselaw makes clear that while observations made by police
officers of an accused person’s unnatural body movements may be considered, it
is only “when these factors tie in with something more concrete that an
officer’s grounds become more secure”: see justice d. garg and a. kapoor,
detention,
arrest and right to counsel
(toronto: emond publishing, 2024) at p. 271.
that “something more” was absent here.  fundamentally, dc sgroi relied on
uncorroborated information, provided at an unknown time, that mr. kikiantonis
had a gun, combined with observations of what can only be described as entirely
innocuous behaviour: see
r. v. nicholls
,
2022 onca 133
, at paras.
4-8
.
i recognize that officers often encounter, as they did here,
fast-moving situations involving the possibility that the person under
investigation had a firearm in a busy area of the city. officers must sometimes
act quickly without the benefit of hindsight. i am also mindful of the court of
appeal’s recent caution in
asante, supra,
at para. 57 that judges “must
remember that the reasonable and probable grounds standard depends upon
probabilities, not certainties. it does not require proof beyond a reasonable
doubt, nor even proof on a balance of probabilities:
beave
r, at para.
72
. reasonable probabilities can co-exist with competing reasonable
probabilities.”
nevertheless, i find a breach of
sections 9
and
8
of the
charter
.
the arrest was unlawful, and a search incident to arrest is unreasonable if
the underlying arrest was unlawful: see
r. v. sabiston
,
2023 skca 105
,
at paras.
4 and 93
(this conclusion accepted by the majority of the supreme
court of canada in
r. v. sabiston
,
2024 scc 33
);
r. v. gilliland
,
2025 bcsc 568
, at para.
42
.
strip searches and section 8 of the
charter
strip searches were recognized by the supreme court of canada in
r.
v. golden
,
2001 scc 83
, to involve a “significant and direct interference
with personal privacy.” they often constitute a “humiliating, degrading and
traumatic experience for individuals subjected to them”: see para. 83. the
supreme court held that strip searches performed on a routine basis at a police
station, and without defined standards associated with them, violated
section 8
of the
charter
.
a strip search is defined as "the removal or rearrangement
of some or all of the clothing of a person so as to permit a visual inspection
of a person's private areas, namely genitals, buttocks, breasts (in the case of
a female), or undergarments":
golden
, at para.
47
.
in
muller
,
supra,
the ontario court of appeal
summarized the law as it applies to the constitutional validity of strip
searches at paras. 56 to 60 (my emphasis added):
where a strip search is justified
as an incident to arrest, the arrest itself must be lawful: golden, at para.
91
. the search must also be incident to the arrest. in other words, the search
must be related to the purpose of the arrest: caslake, at para. 17; golden, at
para.
92
. in this case, the arrest was for drug trafficking, more accurately,
possession of drugs for the purpose of trafficking. it is to that purpose the
strip search had to relate.
the reasonableness of the search
for evidence, including the reasonableness of the strip search, is governed by
the need to preserve evidence and prevent its disposal by the arrested person.
where arresting officers suspect the arrested person may have secreted evidence
on areas of his or her body that can only be exposed by a strip search, the
risk of disposal must be reasonably assessed in all the circumstances: golden,
at para.
93
.
the mere possibility that an
individual may be concealing drugs on his or her person is not sufficient to
justify a strip search of that person
:
golden, at para.
94
. further,
strip searches conducted as a matter of routine policy, even if executed in a
reasonable manner, are not reasonable within
s. 8
of the
charter
.
compelling
reasons, rooted in the circumstances of the arrest, are required to render a
strip search reasonable, even where the execution is flawless
:
golden, at para.
95
. rote application of police policy is anathema to the
case-specific, fact-sensitive consideration mandated by hunter v. southam inc.
the fact that police have
reasonable grounds to arrest a person without warrant under s. 495(1)(a) does
not, on its own, clothe them with automatic authority to carry out a strip
search. this is so even where the strip search qualifies as incidental to a
lawful arrest: golden, at para.
98
. something further relating to the purpose
of the strip search is required. that something further is that the
police
must have reasonable and probable grounds for concluding a strip search is
necessary in the specific circumstances of the arrest:
golden, at para.
98
.
the serious infringements of
privacy and personal dignity that are inevitable consequences of strip searches
require that, to be constitutionally valid, the strip search must be:
i.
conducted as an incident to a lawful arrest;
ii.
conducted for the purpose of discovering weapons or evidence on the body
of the arrested person related to the reason for the arrest;
iii.
based on reasonable and probable grounds for concluding a strip search
is necessary in the circumstances of the arrest; and
iv.
conducted in a reasonable manner.
in
golden
, at para.
101
, the supreme court of canada
concluded the guidelines for strip searches contained in the
police and
criminal evidence act 1984
(u.k.), 1984, c. 60 (pace), accorded with the
constitutional requirements of
section 8
of the
charter
. the pace
questions include the following:
•
will the strip search be carried out in a private area such that
no one other than the individuals engaged in the search can observe the search?
•
will a proper record be kept of the reasons for and the manner in
which the strip search was conducted?
analysis
i.
frisk search in the booking hall
i begin by considering the “frisk search” that occurred in the
booking hall at 11 division, captured on video, before the subsequent formal
strip search. it is not disputed that the officers were lawfully permitted to
conduct a frisk search to check mr. kikiantonis’ clothing and body for drugs
and possible weapons. however, mr. paradkar submits that the frisk search
conducted by special constable walker crossed a line, even if only briefly. the
search was, in fact, a strip search once he pulled back his client’s jeans and
underwear and peered down into his genitalia and/or buttocks.
notably, special constable walker did not dispute that this is
what factually occurred. my own review of the video leads me to conclude that
this is exactly what happened. officer walker can be seen pulling back mr.
kikiantonis’ pants at the waist, along with any clothing found beneath them,
and peering inside the pants towards his lower body. during his testimony, he
appeared to take pride in the “thorough” frisk search he conducted, seemingly
unaware that he may have proceeded into the domain of a strip search.
the tps policy defining frisk and strip searches is clear. a
frisk search is one which, despite any removal of a detainee’s clothing, “does
not expose a person’s undergarments, or the areas of the body normally covered
by undergarments.” special constable walker’s excessive search techniques
produced just that result. though it may have only lasted a few seconds, it was
not a frisk search – it was properly characterized as a strip search: see
r.
v. bootsma
,
2022 abqb 45
, at paras.
62-70
;
r. v. ali
,
2011 onsc 424
,
at para.
61
.
it was also recorded on video, and in plain view of the other
officers present at the time. none of the other officers objected or voiced any
concern. in
golden
, the supreme court held that strip searches must be
conducted in private to minimize the invasion of privacy and the threat to the
detainee’s bodily integrity: see para. 102. yet the search of mr. kikianontis
was carried out by an experienced officer, unaware of his mistake, while mr.
kikiantonis was in plain view in the hallway of the division.
if
frisk searches are permitted to effectively become strip searches due to
inadequate judicial oversight, the
charter
rights of every detainee in
police custody risk permanent erosion. special constable walker did not seem to
grasp the significance of where the line is drawn between the two. he was
unaware of
golden
, the leading authority from the supreme court of
canada, which was decided over 20 years ago. he testified that, while he was
familiar with the tps policy on searching detainees in custody, he had not
thoroughly read it and was not fully aware of its details. he simply did not
seem to care.
his
apparent indifference to the policies he is expected to faithfully execute as a
police officer, as well as the decisions of the courts that developed those
policies, is deeply disappointing. police officers should both understand and
appreciate the fundamental importance of the rights of those in their custody
and their responsibilities to adhere to the law. while det. raspberry impressed
me with his testimony and seemed genuinely committed to following the letter of
the law, he still allowed special constable walker to cross the line into a
strip search, making no effort to intervene or voicing any concern. both he and
dc moorcroft came across as blissfully unaware that what was happening right
before their eyes was wrong.
i
find a violation of mr. kikiantonis’ rights under
section 8
of the
charter
.
ii.
grounds to authorize the strip search at 11
division
the
articulated justification for the strip search by det. raspberry was that the
scale, drug packaging, and satchel had some drug residue in them. no further
grounds were provided; rather, the officer relied on his experience with the
drug trade in his testimony to further justify his decision. on the booking
video, curiously, he did not mention mr. kikiantonis’ arrest for possession of
a loaded firearm as a factor he considered.
officers
are also entitled to rely on their own experience when forming grounds: see
chehil
at paras.
45-7
. det. raspberry testified he had considerable experience
with suspects and detainees hiding drugs in parts of their bodies, and that
those drugs might be located after a frisk search, even if that frisk search
did not reveal any drugs.
in
muller
, the ontario court of appeal was explicit that the “mere
possibility” a detainee may be concealing drugs on his person is insufficient.
the police must have reasonable and probable grounds that conducting a strip
search is necessary in the specific circumstances of the arrest: see
golden
at para.
98
.
the
appellant was arrested for possession of crack cocaine for the purpose of
trafficking. the police had received information from two confidential sources
indicating that the appellant was trafficking drugs in an apartment. the information
provided to the police was quite recent – the alleged drug dealing had occurred
only hours prior. one of the sources had been proven reliable in the past,
while the other was untested: see paras. 8 and 40. upon the officers' arrival
outside the apartment building where the drug trafficking was taking place,
they found the suspect exiting through a side door: see para. 26. after
arresting the appellant, the officers conducted a frisk search and discovered
three cellphones and some cash. they did not find any drugs or other typical
indicators of drug trafficking. however, the officers did locate a digital
scale that the appellant had discarded just prior to his arrest, which had a
residue of white powder on its surface.
the
court of appeal held that the officers had sufficient grounds for a strip
search based on the cumulative effect of those factors. while the evidence
linking mr. kikiantonis to drug dealing was much weaker than what was
considered by the court in
muller
,
det. raspberry also noted on the
booking video that mr. kikiantonis had been arrested for possession of a loaded
firearm, even if he did not cite that fact specifically when explaining his
grounds to authorize a strip search. in
r. v. hassan
,
2023 onsc 1300
,
justice nakatsuru ruled that the grounds for a strip search were established
when the accused was arrested for possession of a loaded firearm and had
outstanding drug-trafficking charges: see para. 60.
when
assessing the objective reasonableness of an officer’s grounds, i must consider
the totality of the circumstances known to the officer at the time, even if some
of the individual factors were not specifically articulated: see
r. v.
asante,
2025 onca 387
, at para.
30
. i find that, objectively, although this
was a close call, there were reasonable and probable grounds to justify a strip
search. this portion of the
charter
application is therefore dismissed.
iii.
lack of an adequate record
not
a single officer checked whether the audio recording equipment was functioning
properly in the room designated for strip searches at 11 division. det. raspberry,
who was responsible for authorizing strip searches on the night in question,
did not ensure that any strip search he authorized would be properly recorded
and documented. this was inconsistent with both tps policy and the requirements
of the
charter
.
this
was a glaring example of unacceptable police negligence. in
r. v. janeiro,
2022
onca 118
, justice paciocco explained the duty of the police to preserve
relevant evidence at paras. 107-8:
where a
charter
applicant
has shown that disclosable evidence has been lost, a
charter
breach
contrary to
s. 7
will be found unless the crown has provided a satisfactory
explanation for that loss, thereby demonstrating that an abuse of process has
not occurred. the crown may do so by establishing that the evidence has not
been destroyed or lost by unacceptable negligence, that is, negligence that
goes beyond mere negligence. this can be accomplished by showing that
reasonable steps were taken in the circumstances to preserve the evidence,
bearing in mind the relevance that the evidence was perceived to have at the
time it was lost or destroyed:
r. v. la
,
1997 canlii 309 (scc)
, 2
s.c.r. 680, at paras.
20-22
;
r. v. hersi
,
2019 onca 94
, 373
c.c.c. (3d) 229, at para.
30
.
indeed, the relevance or
importance of the evidence is an important consideration in setting the degree
of care expected. as the relevance of the evidence increases, so too does the
degree of care required in preserving the evidence:
la
,
at para. 21;
hersi
, at para.
30
. similarly, as the relevance
decreases, the required degree of care is reduced…
i
agree with mr. paradkar that the police have a high duty of care to preserve a
recording of a strip search. there is a heightened obligation to safeguard such
essential evidence, which will be crucial in determining how a detainee has
been treated while they are at their most vulnerable and subjected to a
degrading search. sgt. raspberry and dc moorcroft testified that strip searches
have rarely been authorized in recent years, highlighting the importance of
ensuring that the recording equipment functions properly when such an uncommon
procedure is utilized. i did not hear of any reasonable steps taken by the tps
to preserve this audio recording.
dc pak did not explain why the audio recording wasn’t requested
from 11 division during the standard disclosure process following mr.
kikiantonis’ arrest. it was only on august 22, 2024, when he looked into ms.
andersen's request for the recording that he discovered it was lost. had he
requested the recording before may 2024, which was still a year after mr.
kikiantonis’ arrest, it would have been preserved. the other case materials
available to him documented that a strip search on mr. kikiantonis had been
authorized and that 11 division used audio equipment to record these searches.
he did not dispute that he had a legal obligation to preserve relevant
evidence.
of
equal concern is that officers walker and moorcroft did not make any notes
regarding the search procedure involving mr. kikiantonis. dc moorcroft
acknowledged during his testimony that he had a duty to take detailed notes on
how the search was conducted, yet he failed to uphold his professional
standards in this case. in contrast, special constable walker seemed shocked at
mr. paradkar’s suggestion that his duty to create comprehensive notes of his
involvement in this case as an officer would include documenting the manner in
which a strip search was carried out. when confronted with the tps policy
requiring that level of notetaking, he denied understanding that it meant he
should personally create these notes. that was not credible.
the
policy was crystal clear. while i appreciate dc moorcroft’s candour regarding
his error of omission, this represents a severe failure on the part of both
officers. i was particularly taken aback by special constable walker’s
testimony that he has never taken notes during possibly thousands of strip
searches. in his view, it seems pointless to do so unless something unusual
occurs.
in
muller
, the court of appeal found that the police officer's failure to
create an adequate record of the strip search constituted a breach of
section 8
of the
charter
: see para. 83. however, in the later decision of
hassan
,
justice nakatsuru of the superior court of justice cautioned that the
“adequacy of the record required for a strip search will depend on the context
of the strip search. greater notation of the reasons for, and how, a strip
search is conducted is necessary for a strip search done in the field than for
a strip search in a police station”: see para. 62. in that case, while the
officers could have prepared “better notes”, justice nakatsuru found the record
adequate and concluded there was no breach of the accused’s section 8 rights. see
also
r. v. sitladeen
,
2024 onsc 582
, at paras.
90-91
, where justice charney
reached the same conclusion on similar facts.
in
this case, there are no notes on how the strip search at the 11 division was
conducted. none at all, because the officers did not understand they had a duty
to prepare them. this is qualitatively very different from the insufficient
notes that existed in other cases, where at least some notes were prepared. the
total absence of officer notes in this case is a significant concern. the audio
recording failed, and the officers have no meaningful recollection of this
specific strip search. an accurate record could have been easily created at the
time of the search or shortly thereafter, when the details of that search would
have been fresh in the officers’ memories.
i
find that the failure to create and preserve a proper record of mr. kikiantonis’
strip search constitutes a breach of
section 8
of the
charter
:
see also
r.
v. browne
,
2012 onsc 3862
, at para.
19
;
r. v. inyat
,
o.j. no.
551 (s.c.j.), at paras 185-6
.
iv.
the search of mr. kikiantonis at the roadside
whether
mr. kikiantonis was subjected to a strip search at the roadside was a matter of
dispute between the parties. a strip search conducted in the field will only be
permitted in exigent circumstances. in
golden
, at para.
102
, justices
iacobucci and arbour wrote the following:
such exigent circumstances will
only be established where the police have reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that it is necessary to conduct the search in the field rather than at
the police station.  strip searches conducted in the field could only be
justified where there is a demonstrated necessity and urgency to search for
weapons or objects that could be used to threaten the safety of the accused,
the arresting officers or other individuals.  the police would also have to
show why it would have been unsafe to wait and conduct the strip search at the
police station rather than in the field.  strip searches conducted in the field
represent a much greater invasion of privacy and pose a greater threat to the
detainee’s bodily integrity and, for this reason, field strip searches can only
be justified in exigent circumstances.
in
golden
,
the crown attempted to justify the field search on the basis
"that exigency arose from the risk that this evidence might be lost or
destroyed if police waited to conduct the strip search until the appellant was
transported to a police station": see para. 107. an officer had observed
the appellant crushing what appeared to be crack cocaine between his fingers
just after his arrest. the supreme court rejected the crown’s argument, noting
that the police station was only a short distance away, as was 11 division in
the case of mr. kikiantonis. there was no reasonable prospect that the appellant,
who was handcuffed, would have been able to discard the drugs hidden on his
person surreptitiously.
in
r. v. pilon
,
2018 onca 959
, the appellant was arrested in a motel room
and placed in handcuffs. officers observed him attempting to put his hands in
the front and back of the shorts he was wearing. following a search incident to
the arrest, the officers noted that the appellant was wearing two pairs of
athletic shorts and continued their search, looking inside the second pair. an
officer was able to observe the top of the appellant’s buttocks and an elastic
band attached to his penis.
the
officer who conducted the search testified that, based on previous
investigations, he was concerned the appellant might have drugs in his groin
area. the court of appeal held that the crown failed to provide sufficient
evidence of exigent circumstances related to safety or the need to preserve
evidence to justify a field search. there was a violation of the appellant’s
section 8 rights: see paras. 31-32.
similarly,
in
bootsma
,
supra
, rcmp officers investigating the accused
noticed a bulge in his pants near the waistband. the officers were concerned
that he might be concealing something, such as a weapon. they also had
information that he was travelling to sell drugs. an officer pulled mr.
bootsma’s underwear waistband away from his body and looked down to see what
was there. justice funk held that the search constituted an unlawful field
strip search, breaching
section 8
of the
charter
: see paras. 82-86.
assessing
the evidence relevant to this issue, i find dc dunlop’s testimony to be unreliable.
he repeated during his testimony that he had memory issues and was often “not
sure” of a detail, lacking a strong, independent recollection of how he
searched mr. kikiantonis. additionally, he was not wearing a body-worn camera
at the time, and he acknowledged that his notes contained errors and were
missing details. there were also notable inconsistencies in his testimony, such
as whether dc storey or dc kapitany ordered the takedown of mr. kikiantonis. his
failure to take comprehensive notes of his role in the investigation, combined
with his poor memory, significantly diminishes the weight i can attach to this
testimony.
he
denied strip searching mr. kikiantonis specifically but agreed that he
conducted a “thorough” search at the roadside. he remembered that he checked
mr. kikiantonis’ waistband to ensure nothing was “hidden in there.” he agreed
he was searching with both his hands and eyes and explained that the purpose of
the waistband portion of his search was to see if anything might be “down
there,” referring to mr. kikiantonis’ lower body inside his pants. how he
distinguished a frisk search from a strip search in his mind was not clarified.
the
other officers present at the time were not helpful. dc vukovic testified that
he was not paying attention to what transpired between dc dunlop and mr.
kikiantonis. dc mckenzie was “not focused” on the manner of search conducted by
dc dunlop. dc sgroi did not believe he witnessed a strip search but was “not
sure” if he ever saw mr. kikiantonis’ underwear exposed and was not personally
inspecting the search. he did see mr. kikiantonis leaning over the hood of one
of the other officers’ undercover police cars. det. storey witnessed this as
well but, similarly, was not paying attention to the search conducted by dc
dunlop and only observed a “small part” of it.
by
contrast, mr. kikiantonis’ testimony was credible and reliable. he provided detailed
information about how dc dunlop searched him. he was adamant that there was a
pat-down search followed by a frisk search that involved his clothing being
manipulated. unsurprisingly, the events stood out in his mind. he was looking
directly at dc dunlop when the officer pulled back his jeans and underwear
while looking down into his pants. he was honest about his inability to provide
some details, such as which officers were immediately present or precisely
where he was standing on the sidewalk. he explained that his mind was focused
on how he was being treated and how he felt. on the body-worn camera footage of
the two transporting officers, which recorded mr. kikiantonis shortly after his
arrest, he appears distraught, as if something had happened to him out of the
ordinary earlier that evening. i find this lends support to his testimony, which
i accept.
on a balance of probabilities, i conclude that mr. kikiantonis
was subjected to a brief field strip search by dc dunlop.
the
crown has not demonstrated any exigent circumstances to justify this search.
mr. kikiantonis was cooperative and passive. he was handcuffed almost
immediately after his arrest. not a single officer observed him attempting to
conceal anything. he was going to be transported to 11 division, a short
distance away. the mere possibility of something unsafe being located elsewhere
on his person after the frisk search was completed does not justify a strip
search done in public view.
i
therefore find another breach of
section 8
of the
charter
. there was no
record created of this field strip search whatsoever by dc dunlop. the
importance of properly documenting such a search is well established, and the
failure of the officer to do so significantly elevates the seriousness of the
breach: see
hassan
,
at para.
62
.
charter
section 7
i
am satisfied that
section 7
of the
charter
was also violated in each of these
occasions. in
r. v.
s.c.
,
2025 onsc 1887
, justice campbell found
that an unlawful strip search can constitute a violation of a detainee’s
“security of the person”: see para. 144.
however,
i find, as justice campbell did, that the violations in this case under section
7 essentially mirror those that occurred under section 8: see para. 148. in
r.
v. j.f.,
2025 oncj 54
, justice rose held that “[w]hen the constitutional
standard under parallel
charter
sections is engaged it is not necessary
to make findings under both, or all particularly where the remedy would be the
same”: see para. 67. justice campbell endorsed this analysis at para. 151 of
his decision, and i do as well.
charter
section
12
in
s.c.,
campbell j. held that a strip search would not normally constitute
a violation of
section 12
of the
charter
: see para. 159.  that decision
is binding upon me. i dismiss this component of the application.
charter
section
10(b)
sgt. raspberry did not provide mr. kikiantonis with an opportunity
to consult with counsel after he was informed he would be strip-searched at 11
division. according to
thompson
, this constitutes a violation of
section
10(b)
of the
charter
.
remedy –
charter
section 24(2)
section
24(2)
of the
charter
requires the court to determine whether the
admission of evidence obtained in breach of an accused person’s
charter
rights could bring the administration of justice into disrepute. the supreme
court of canada summarized the applicable law in
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12
,
at paras.
74-5
:
section 24(2)
of
the
charter
is triggered where evidence is “obtained in a manner”
that violates an accused’s
charter
rights. a
s. 24(2)
inquiry examines the
impact of admitting evidence obtained in breach of the
charter
on
public confidence in the justice system over the long term, based on three
lines of inquiry: (1) the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing state conduct;
(2) the impact of the breach on the accused’s
charter
-protected interests; and
(3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on the merits.
a court’s task is to balance the assessments under these three lines of inquiry
“to determine whether, considering all the circumstances, admission of the evidence
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute” (
grant
, at
para. 71; see also
le
, at paras. 139-42).
section 24(2) does not create
an automatic exclusionary rule when evidence is obtained in breach of
a
charter
right. the accused bears the onus of establishing that,
having regard to all the circumstances, the admission of the evidence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute (see
collins
, at
p. 280;
fearon
,
at para. 89; see also s. c. hill, d. m. tanovich and l. p.
strezos,
mcwilliams’ canadian criminal evidence
(5th ed.
(loose-leaf)), at § 19:12).
the
supreme court in
tim
reiterated how a trial court should assess whether
evidence was “obtained in a manner” that breached an accused person’s
charter
rights at para. 78. courts should take a “purposive and generous approach”,
considering the “entire chain of events” involving the
charter
breaches and
the impugned evidence. the connection between the breaches and evidence can be
“temporal, contextual, causal or a combination of the three.” a strict causal
connection is not required, however: see also
r. v. mian
,
2014 scc 54
,
at para.
83
. at the same time, too remote or tenuous a connection is not
sufficient:
r. v. wittwer,
2008 scc 33
, at para.
21
.
mr.
kikiantonis’ arrest and the search that occurred incident to that arrest
directly led to the discovery of the firearm. but the strip searches, in my
view, must also be considered. he should not be denied potential
charter
relief
under
section 24(2)
for these breaches of
section 8
rights because the strip
searches occurred after the firearm was already located. in this case, the
events “wove a single tapestry of investigative activity”: see
thompson
at
para.
90
.
i.
seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
conduct
under the first branch of the
grant
test
,
i must situate
the police conduct on the scale of blameworthiness. the more blameworthy the
conduct, the stronger the argument for excluding the evidence:
r. v.
paterson
,
2017 scc 15
, at para.
43
.
the officers agreed they did not have sufficient grounds to justify
mr. kikiantonis’ arrest when they first observed him. various officers
indicated that they were tasked with investigating and conducting surveillance.
they did not have a warrant for him. it was only when dc sgroi communicated
that he had made observations leading him to conclude that the accused was in
possession of a firearm that a decision was made to initiate a takedown. that
was the inflection point.
as i have concluded, this was insufficient to establish reasonable
and probable grounds. far more was required. mr. kikiantonis was arrested based
on little more than mere suspicion that he possessed a firearm. additionally,
there was no urgency that would have justified their conduct: see
hassan
,
at para.
113
.
i do not, for a moment, suggest that police officers should refrain
from acting on information provided to them about illegal firearm ownership. i
recognize that they must make rapid decisions in often volatile situations
where serious, if not overwhelming, public safety concerns may be present: see
r.
v. golub
,
1997 canlii 6316
(ont. c.a.). but this was not a case involving
exigent circumstances. the officers acted without sufficient grounds. the fact
that their suspicion, in this case, turned out to be correct does not lessen
their blameworthiness: see
beaver
at para.
72
.
i acknowledge this was not a case of blatant disregard for
charter
rights either. the officers, at the time, had access to more information than i
may lawfully consider, due to my ruling on the
garofoli
application.
nevertheless, even with access to that information, they still did not believe
they could arrest mr. kikiantonis when they first located him. undue reliance
on dc sgroi’s observations that mr. kikiantonis was grasping at his jacket
pocket constituted an error in judgment. however, i accept that dc sgroi
genuinely believed mr. kikiantonis likely had a firearm. i find that the
decision to make an arrest therefore falls at the less severe end of the scale
of culpability and moderately favours exclusion: see
tim
at paras.
76-80
.
the same cannot be said for the level of state misconduct regarding
the various strip searches that occurred. dc dunlop and special constable
walker appeared to be unaware of the limits of their authority to search mr.
kikiantonis, despite unambiguous instructions from tps policy and 20 years
since the supreme court’s decision in
golden
. both officers showed
carelessness in their duties and disregard for mr. kikiantonis’ constitutional
rights. furthermore, the fact that no officer that night attempted to ensure
that a proper record was created of the formal strip search that was
authorized, including det. raspberry, demonstrates significant police
negligence.
worse, dc dunlop conducted a field strip search without justification,
and i rejected his testimony that it did not occur. there was a pattern of
charter
infringing state misconduct that began with mr. kikiantonis’ arrest.
i acknowledge that sgt. raspberry cannot be faulted for failing to
provide mr. kikiantonis with a further opportunity to consult with counsel after
the decision was made to authorize a strip search.
thompson
had not yet
been decided, and the state of the law at the time did not yet create such a
constitutional obligation: see para. 103.
nevertheless, overall, there was a pattern of careless police work
in this case, and courts should disassociate themselves from such conduct, even
in the absence of a finding of bad faith: see
r. v. grant and scott
,
2025 onsc 3513
, at para.
156
. this factor weighs heavily against the inclusion
of the evidence when considering these multiple, serious breaches.
ii.
the impact of the breach on the
charter
-protected
interests of the accused
the second part of the
grant
test considers the seriousness
of the impact of
charter
breaches on the
charter
-protected
interests of the accused. the "more serious the impact on the accused's
constitutional rights, the more the admission of the evidence is likely to
bring the administration of justice into disrepute": see
r. v. côté
,
2011 scc 46 (canlii)
, at para.
47
.
section 9 protects against arbitrary arrest or
detention. it safeguards the very liberty interests of all canadians. mr. kikiantonis’
section 8 and 9 rights were significantly affected by being arrested, handcuffed,
searched, and transported to 11 division:
r. v. stevenson
,
2014 onca 842
,
at paras.
70-71
.
moreover, an unlawful arrest that leads to unjustified searches
inevitably impacts the arrested person’s privacy interests and human dignity.
strip searches are humiliating and degrading. in this case, two strip searches
occurred without justification. one took place in public view on a street
corner. another was recorded on video at the police division. the final strip
search was authorized, but no record was kept of what transpired during the
search. the police misconduct was serious and warrants the court's dissociation
from these violations of mr. kikiantonis’ rights. each of these violations
stemmed from the initial unlawful arrest, making them all interconnected.
mr. kikiantonis was a compelling witness. i accept his testimony
about the impact these searches had on him without reservation. he described in
detail how he was searched, on each occasion, and the shame and embarrassment
that he felt. he did not exaggerate or embellish his testimony and was
exceedingly fair. he acknowledged that the officers who pulled back his
underwear and jeans during the “frisk” searches did so only for a few seconds. he
also agreed officers moorcroft and walker were polite when they completed the
formal strip search at 11 division and he never touched his body directly.
but he was not shaken during cross-examination about the humiliation
that accompanied each of these searches. he was particularly concerned that
other people, including civilians, could see him being searched while on street
at the time of his arrest. he directly observed dc dunlop looking down into his
pants, which was very unsettling. i accept these violations of his
charter
rights had a significant impact on him emotionally.
it would be easy to dismiss the excessive frisk searches in this
case as having happened relatively briefly and, therefore, deeming them unworthy
of great weight. the unlawful portion of the search on camera at 11 division
only lasted two or three seconds, and the search at the roadside was also brief
in duration. taking such an approach would be wrong. each infraction of mr.
kikiantonis’ rights violated his dignity and harmed the repute of the
administration of justice. they formed a pattern of conduct by the police that
showed disregard for well-established constitutional practices. they matter.
as
stated by the ontario court of appeal in
thompson
at para.
54
:
it is difficult to quarrel with
these observations. within the hierarchy of interests protected by
s. 8
of the
charter
, bodily searches rank among the most intrusive. the removal of clothing
and inspection of the body, including intimate areas of the body, falls at the
most serious end of the invasiveness spectrum. the impact of a strip search
goes beyond the physical. it has the potential to induce anxiety, uncertainty,
distress, and embarrassment. and as noted in
fearon
, it has the
potential to undermine human dignity.
with respect to the violation of
section 10(b)
of the
charter
,
i
cannot speculate as to whether mr. kikiantonis would have consulted counsel
once informed of sgt. raspberry’s decision to authorize a strip search. i agree
with ms. andersen that mr. kikiantonis had rejected the offer of consulting
counsel only moments before, as can be seen in the booking video. but he was
still entitled to the “psychological assurance” that he could have received
from counsel, when faced with this new jeopardy: see
thompson
at para.
108
. as noted by the court of appeal, “the call to counsel can serve a
number of tangible and intangible benefits for the detainee, while imposing a
relatively minimal burden on police investigators”: see para. 74.
overall, i must consider the impact of all of the breaches i have
found and consider them cumulatively:
thompson
at para.
109
. this factor
weighs heavily against the inclusion of the evidence.
iii.
society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits
the administration of justice may be brought into disrepute due to
the exclusion of relevant and reliable evidence: see
grant
,
supra
,
at para. 81. the firearm serves as reliable evidence that is essential to the
crown’s case. firearms offences are undoubtedly among the most serious that
regularly come before the courts in toronto.
but, as explained by justice akbarali in
grant and scott
,
even
with that consideration in mind, there is another side to the coin: “society
has an interest in ensuring that the state acts in a manner that respects
charter
rights when investigating people for offences that carry significant penalties
and the potential for a lengthy term of imprisonment”: see para. 173. i agree
with this observation, and note that the supreme court has been clear that the
administration of justice may be brought into disrepute by admitting evidence obtained
in circumstances, that, if approved of by the courts, would be seen as
tantamount to “judicial condonation of unacceptable conduct”: see
r. v. le
,
2019 scc 34
, at para.
158
.
this factor favours admission of the evidence, but not strongly.
iv.
balancing
in
tim
, at para.
82
, the supreme court described the
balancing required under section 24(2):
the final step in
the s. 24(2) analysis involves balancing the factors under the three lines of
inquiry to assess the impact of admission or exclusion of the evidence on the
long-term repute of the administration of justice. such balancing involves a
qualitative exercise, one that is not capable of mathematical precision (see
grant, at paras. 86 and 140; harrison, at para. 36). each factor must be
assessed and weighed in the balance, focussing on the long-term integrity of,
and public confidence in, the administration of justice (see grant, at para.
68). the balancing is prospective: it aims to ensure that evidence obtained
through a
charter
breach “does not do further damage to the repute of the
justice system” (grant, at para. 69). the balancing is also societal: the goal
is not to punish the police, but rather to address systemic concerns by
analyzing “the broad impact of admission of the evidence on the long-term
repute of the justice system” (grant, at para. 70; see also le, at para. 139).
where officers made an arrest without reasonable and probable
grounds, but nearly met that standard, an unlawfully seized firearm may still
be admitted: see
r. v nicholls
,
2022 onca 133
, at para.
14
. however,
when an officer’s conduct was far from justifying an arrest and indicated bad
faith, firearms have been excluded: see, for example,
hassan
, at paras.
133-136
. even in the absence of bad faith or improper motives by the police,
where they were simply considerably off the mark from what was required for a
lawful detention or arrest and search, reliable evidence including firearms may
be excluded: see, for example, justice mcarthur’s recent decision in
r. v.
dean,
2025 onsc 3446
.
although i have not found that the officers in this case acted in
bad faith, the arrest and search that followed were unjustified. the repeated
strip searches were carried out with indifference to mr. kikiantonis' dignity
and well-established law. the failure to properly document them was grossly
negligent. mr. kikiantonis should also have been allowed to consult with
counsel after being informed by sgt. raspberry that he would be subject to a
strip search at 11 division.
the series of
charter
breaches that occurred in this case
were all undertaken by a single police service, within a relatively short
timeframe, establishing a pattern which demands denunciation from the court:
see
thompson
at
para.
122
.
if the first and second inquiries strongly favour exclusion, the
third inquiry will rarely, if ever, tip the balance the other way:
le
,
at para. 142;
r. v. lafrance
,
2022 scc 32
, at para.
90
. in my final
assessment, the combined force of the first two lines of inquiry in this case
outweighs the third factor, and the balance therefore demands the exclusion of
the firearm:
beaver
at para.
134
.
charter section 24(1)
due to my conclusion under section 24(2), i decline to address mr.
paradkar’s alternative written submission that a stay of proceedings was an
appropriate remedy.
conclusion
as the firearm and ammunition have been excluded from evidence, i
find mr. kikiantonis not guilty of all charges.
released: july 28, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
i permitted the officer to provide an estimate of his location after the crown
raised public-interest privilege regarding the precise investigative techniques
employed that evening: see, for example,
r. v. hernandez
,
2010 bcca 514
,
at para.
23
.
during final arguments, ms. andersen suggested the officers could have lawfully
detained mr. kikiantonis even if they lacked the grounds to arrest him. without
deciding the matter, i note that the officers did not invoke the common law
power of investigatory detention in their testimony. as stated by the british columbia
court of appeal in
r. v. whitaker
,
2008 bcca 174
, “when the police have
wrongfully arrested someone, their actions cannot be defended on the basis that
they could have detained this person on some other basis. in deciding whether
the police infringed
charter
rights, they are to be judged on what they did,
not what they could have done”: see para. 65;
r. v. sabiston
, sask.
c.a., reasons of tholl j.a. at para. 93, adopted by the supreme court of
canada: see
r. v. sabiston,
2024 scc 33
.