ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. s.k.a.,
2025 oncj 437
date:
2025 08 25
court
file no.:  toronto region
4810
998 23 48115940
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
s.k.a.
before
justice c. faria
heard
on august 20, 2025
oral
decision august 20, 2025
written
reasons for ruling of s. 486.2 cctv application
released
on august 25, 2025
nilam lakhani..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
yuvika johri......................................................................... counsel
for the accused s.k.a.
faria j.:
i.
overview
s.k.a. is charged with 9 criminal offences. he
is alleged to have sexually assaulted his wife twice, assaulted her five times,
and uttered two threats to her during april and may 2023 contrary to the
criminal
code
.
before the start of the trial, the crown filed
an application requesting the complainant testify via cctv, or in the
alternative, behind a screen, pursuant to s. 486.2(2). the defence filed a
response opposing the application.
on the first day of trial, august 18, 2025, the
crown withdrew its application.  the trial began with the evidence of k.p., the
complainant, testifying in person and without any testimonial aids.
on august 20, 2025, the second day of trial, the
crown renewed its application and requested k.p. continue the examination in-chief
via cctv. the defence continued to oppose the use of either cctv or a screen.
submissions were heard. an oral ruling was made
the same day granting the application, with reasons to follow.  these are my
reasons for the ruling.
ii.
evidence
the crown filed an affidavit from d.c. julia
kotes signed august 7, 2025.  she summarizes a conversation she had with the
complainant, k.p. on june 23, 2023. a brief summary of her affidavit is as
follows:
•
k.p. is 32 years old.
•
she married s.k.a in august of 2021 and they share
a son.
•
k.p. has not seen or communicated with s.k.a.
since may 28, 2023.  their son lives with her, and they have no custody
agreement or family court order regarding that child.
•
k.p. received an e-transfer from s.k.a. of 5000
indian rupees with no message on june 20, 2025. this is the only money she has
received since their separation on may 28, 2023.
•
the charges are physical, sexual, and
threatening in nature.
•
k.p. said she feels scared of s.k.a. she knows
he can control her and has done so in the past, even with a look.
•
k.p. said that his look makes her unable to
speak freely.
•
k.p. said s.k.a.’s look impedes her ability to
express details and explain what happened to her.
•
k.p. said she is nervous, has “stage fright” and
having to see s.k.a. in the courtroom and face him adds to these feelings. she feels
she will not recall all the details during the trial if he is looking at her.
•
k.p. believes she will be very emotional seeing
him and this will be a distraction.
•
k.p. is requesting a testimonial aid so she can
concentrate without fear.
the crown added that after testifying in person
in the courtroom, in the presence of s.k.a. on monday, august 18, 2025, k.p.
renewed her request to testify outside the courtroom with officer in charge (oic)
for the day, p.c. westcott.  she stated she was unable to testify to details
and complained s.k.a.’s presence negatively affected her.
the defence did not cross-examine either d.c.
kotes, or oic westcott.
iii.
position of the parties
the crown relied on her factum, submitting that k.p.
requires a testimonial aid to provide the court with a full and candid account
of the allegations. she argues that given the nature of the allegations and the
fears of the complainant, permitting k.p. to testify outside the courtroom, or
in the alternative, behind a screen, will facilitate k.p.’s testimony.
the crown further submitted that k.p.’s
testimony in person without a testimonial aid on the first day of trial demonstrated
good faith and an effort to testify without accommodation. k.p.’s renewed
request is now based on her experience, not just her anticipated fear.
the defence submitted the crown has not met its
onus. she submits k.p.’s feelings of nervousness are normal for all witnesses.
k.p. can avoid looking at s.k.a. if she chooses.
the defence further submitted that if k.p. is
permitted to testify via cctv, the technology cannot be relied upon to not negatively
impact her cross-examination, and presentation of exhibits to k.p.  this, she
submitted, will affect s.k.a.’s right to a fair trial and full answer and
defence.
in addition, the defence submitted that k.p. demonstrated
on the first day of trial that she is well able to testify without an aid as she
provided detailed answers to the crown’s questions.
iv.
legal principles
section 486.2(2) reads:
(2)
despite
section 650
, in any proceedings against an accused, the judge or
justice may, on application of the prosecutor in respect of a witness, or on
application of a witness, order that the witness testify outside the court room
or behind a screen or other device that would allow the witness not to see the
accused if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the order would
facilitate the giving of a full and candid account by the witness of the acts
complained of or would otherwise be in the interest of the proper
administration of justice.
per s. 486.2(3), the factors to considered are:
(a)
the age of the witness;
(b)
the witness’ mental or physical disabilities, if any;
(c)
the nature of the offence;
(d)
the nature of any relationship between the witness and the
accused;
(e)
whether
the witness needs the order for their security or to protect them from
intimidation or retaliation.
(f)
whether
the order is needed to protect the identity of a peace officer who has acted,
is acting or will be acting in an undercover capacity, or of a person who has
acted, is acting or will be acting covertly under the direction of a peace
officer;
(f.1)
whether
the order is needed to protect the witness’s identity if they have had, have or
will have responsibilities relating to national security or intelligence;
(g)
society’s
interest in encouraging the reporting of offences and the participation of
victims and witnesses in the criminal justice process; and
(h)
any other factor that the judge or justice considers relevant.
the onus is on the applicant crown on a balance
of probabilities.
the
canadian victim’s bill of rights,
which came into force in july 2015 states:
13
every
victim has the right to request testimonial aids when appearing as a witness in
proceedings relating to the offence.
v.
analysis
jurisprudence and the development of the
legislation provide context and guidance to my analysis.
the supreme court determined in
r. v.
levogiannis,
1993 canlii 47 (scc)
, 4 s.c.r. 475 at paras. 17, and 31-34 that an order made
pursuant to s. 486.2 does not inherently compromise an accused’s right to a
fair trial, the ability to make full answer and defence, or fundamental justice.
direct evidence from the relevant witness is not
necessary, and an affidavit provided by a police officer may be sufficient to
demonstrate that the requested order should be granted,
r. v. turnbull
,
2017 oncj 309
at paras.
5-6
.
parliament changed the language of s.
486.2(2) from the order having to be “
necessary
to obtain a full
and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of”, [emphasis
added]” to “would
facilitate
the giving of a full and candid
account by the witness of the acts complained” which is a lower threshold.
the amended provisions introduced a new, separate, and
alternative basis for granting the order, whereby a judge may grant such relief
if they are of the opinion that the requested order “would otherwise be in the
interest of the proper administration of justice.”
the supreme court of canada has recognized and emphasized the
courts are to remove barriers to the truth-seeking process and to promote the
truth-seeking goal. in pursuit of these goals, the evidence of all those
involved in judicial proceedings must be given in a way that is most favourable
to eliciting the truth,
r. v. levogiannis
,
1993 canlii 47 (scc)
, 4 s.c.r. 475 at paras.
23 and 33
.
moreover, the supreme court has been repeatedly
clear that complainants testifying in a sexual assault case can experience revictimization,
testifying can be traumatizing and harmful to them, and the nature of some
alleged sexual offences will often favour the granting of accommodations,
r.
v. barton
,
2019 scc 33
at para.
1
,
r. v. r.v.,
2019 scc 41
, at para.
33
, and
r. v. d.d
.,
2000 scc 43
, at para.
60
.
in this case, the particularly relevant factors
are s. 486.2(3)(c) (d) (e) (f) (g) and (h).
the nature of the allegations, as outlined in
the applicant’s factum and not disputed by the defence, occurred in april and
may of 2023. the specifics of the charges are that:
i.
the two sexual assaults are penetrative in
nature. during the first incident, s.k.a. attempted to remove k.p.’s clothing,
she said “no”, he slapped her face, mounted her, put his penis in her mouth,
physically moved her and then forcefully penetrated her vagina and ejaculated
in her. the second allegation of sexual assault was also penetrative and
included slapping k.p. in the face.
ii.
the assaults include s.k.a. allegedly twisting k.p.’s arm, breaking
her bracelet in the process, slapping her face, pushing her repeatedly causing
her to fall, on one occasion the fall caused an injury to her leg, and punching
her in the face.
iii.
the threats include telling k.p. he would kill her and her son.
these are serious allegations of violations that
require evidence of a personal, intimate nature. the evidence can be, and in
this case, k.p. states would be, difficult for her to provide in the presence
of s.k.a.
these charges are in the context of an intimate
partner relationship. k.p. married s.k.a. in august 2021, and joined him in
canada in march 2023. she informed d.c. kotes that she has no support system in
canada. i find the nature of the allegations combined with the nature of the
relationship, in addition to the dependence of k.p. on s.k.a. as a newcomer to
canada, exacerbates her vulnerability to s.k.a. i accept her articulation that
being in his presence in the courtroom impedes her ability to testify against
him.
k.p. has clearly expressed she is afraid of
s.k.a. and feels controlled by his look. his presence further exacerbates her
nervousness and difficulty speaking in public.  although she did not use the word
“intimidated”, i find the description of her fear and her need to avoid his
looking at her while she testifies fits the definition of feeling intimidated.
society has an interest in ensuring that
complainants of sexual assaults can participate in the criminal justice court
process in a way that allows them to provide a full and candid account of their
evidence to the court. it is for this reason that the wording changed from
“necessary” to “facilitate”.
defence is correct that a witness’ nervousness
and discomfort are insufficient to meet the crown’s onus. however, when fear is
expressly articulated, as in this case, and the witness’ feelings are elevated
to the point identified as impeding testimony, then these feelings are a
barrier to a full and candid account. this barrier impedes the court’s the
truth-seeking function.
in this case, the nature of the charges, the
nature of the intimate partner relationship, and the fear the complainant
expresses require accommodation. this is particularly so when the ability of
the court to ameliorate a barrier to testifying in a full, frank and candid
manner, by permitting a witness to testify via cctv is easily available.
in addition, i also consider the fact k.p. tried
to testify in the presence of s.k.a. without a testimonial aid. i observed her avoiding
eye contact with s.k.a. coming into the courtroom, while testifying and when
leaving the courtroom. i observed her look down and away frequently when the
crown asked her questions. i also observed her become emotional and try to
regulate herself. her effort showed a good faith attempt to proceed with out
accommodation.
the defence concern with the technology not
working is valid, particularly if it occurs at an inopportune time during
cross-examination.
given the dependence on technology that
permeates the courtroom process, this is possible.  but it is no different than
a court reporter’s recording technology unexpectedly failing, the internet
going down unpredictably, or the loss of computer functionality by any of the
litigants.
since the covid-19 pandemic in 2020, criminal
courts in this jurisdiction have been using remote appearance technology
regularly in criminal proceedings, including trials, when warranted.  the
possibility of a technical challenge does not impact s.k.a.’s right to full
answer and defence or to a fair trial.
in addition, the cctv process enables the
defence to put exhibits to the witness as if she were in the courtroom.  the court’s
ability to observe the witness’ demeanour and response during cross-examination
is not affected, and in some instances, is better via the cctv with full facial
and body view than in the courtroom.
all the factors relevant to this case favour the
granting of the application.
vi.
conclusion
i find the crown has met its onus on a balance
of probabilities. i grant the application for the complainant k.p. to continue
her evidence via cctv.
released:  august
25, 2025
signed:
justice c.c.g. faria