ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. irwin
, 2025 oncj 247
date:
2025 03 18
court
file no.:  1211210 4038
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
douglas irwin
reasons
for sentence released on march 18, 2025
t. moran................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
a. valeri.......................................................................................... counsel
for douglas irwin
puddington j.:
overview
on october 30, 2024, i found mr. irwin guilty of possession for the
purpose of trafficking 56.2 grams (2 ounces) of fentanyl.  unfortunately, mr.
irwin was not there to hear my judgment, as he had absconded.  i delivered my
judgment in his absence and gave ms. valeri several opportunities to track him
down so that he may participate in the sentencing.  that was unsuccessful, and
the crown’s sentencing submissions therefore proceeded in his absence on january
6, 2025.  i adjourned the matter to january 29, 2025 for my reasons on
sentence, but a few days prior to that, the court learned that mr. irwin had
been arrested and was now in custody.  rather than deliver my judgment on
january 29
th
, i ordered a pre-sentence report and adjourned the
matter to march 5, 2025 so that ms. valeri could make submissions on sentence
on his behalf.
also on march 5, 2025, mr. irwin pled guilty to failing to attend court
before me for judgment as required.
i do not intend to repeat the facts of this case, as
they are contained in my reasons for judgment released on october 30, 2024.
positions on sentence
the crown suggests that a sentence of 8-9 years
jail is appropriate, given mr. irwin’s criminal record and the amount of
fentanyl found in his possession for the purpose of trafficking.  they also
request a
section 109
of the
criminal code
weapons prohibition order for
life, and that a sample of mr. irwin’s dna be taken.   they furthermore request
a forfeiture order, forfeiting a knife and other drug paraphernalia that was
seized.
defence counsel suggests that a sentence of 2-3
years is appropriate in the circumstances.  they take no issue with the
ancillary orders being sought by the crown.
personal circumstances of the offender
a pre-sentence report (“psr”) was prepared while
mr. irwin was in custody after being detained at maplehurst institution in
milton, ontario.  it paints a fuller picture of mr. irwin’s background, education,
and personal relationships.
he does not have an enviable criminal record.
it begins in 2011 and continues consistently until 2023, with drug, driving and
property offences.  he also has had encounters with the criminal justice system
since then, including the incident before me.
mr. irwin grew up in sarnia, ontario and had a
close relationship with his mother, who unfortunately passed away in 2013.  he
graduated from high school, but unfortunately his problems appear to have begun
after he had an all terrain vehicle accident, where he was injured and
prescribed opiates to deal with the accompanying pain.  this led to his future
addiction to such substances, including fentanyl.  he joined the canadian
military in 2008 but left in 2011, in part to look after his ailing mother.  he
has one son, aged 12.
despite the length of time he has had a
substance abuse issue, i am told he now wishes to get that under control through
treatment and counselling.
principles of sentencing and analysis
i must consider what constitutes a proportionate
sentence in these circumstances, having regard to the objectives and principles
of sentencing outlined in
section 718
of the
criminal code
and in the
case law.
as both counsel pointed out, denunciation and
deterrence are the primary considerations when sentencing individuals found
guilty of trafficking or possessing for the purpose of trafficking schedule i
substances such a fentanyl.
the destructive nature of fentanyl, and the opioid
crisis in general are well known.
as our supreme court noted in
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
at paragraph
96
, fentanyl on our streets has a real and deadly
impact on the lives of canadians.  “indeed, trafficking in fentanyl is so deadly
that various courts have described it as a national crisis, reflective of an
increased understanding of the gravity of the harm it causes”.  it has led to countless
overdoses and sever addictions that, of course, lead to other crimes.  mr.
irwin himself testified that his addiction to fentanyl has led him to commit
thefts on a daily basis to support his habit.  while i rejected much of his
testimony, i accept the commonsense statement that in order to pay for these
highly addictive drugs, users will often commit other offences to obtain them.
section 718.2(b) states that “a sentence should
be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances”.  for this reason, our courts look to other
sentencing decisions to determine the appropriate range of sentence for
particular offences.  while the sentencing of fentanyl cases continues to
develop, it has been accepted by our court of appeal and supreme court that
high penitentiary sentences for trafficking in fentanyl are to be expected.
although parity of sentence (as outlined in
section 718.2(b) above) is appropriate, sentencing must always remain an
individual process which requires flexibility in the application of all the
principles of sentencing to the relevant factors related to the offence and the
offender.
the seriousness of mr. irwin’s offences is
evident.  as outlined in my reasons for judgment at trial, i do not accept that
mr. irwin was simply possessing the 2 ounces of fentanyl for his personal use.
the 2 ounces of fentanyl in his possession were possessed for the purpose of
trafficking, and by selling it, he was in turn going to contribute to the
misery that it causes to his users and our community.
i do accept, however, that mr. irwin was in fact
an addict himself.  he was clearly suffering from housing insecurity, and i
have no doubt that he would either use some of the fentanyl in his possession,
or use the proceeds from selling it to support his habit.
i will, therefore, accept that he was an “addict
trafficker”.  given that he had no significant funds in his possession, nor was
he under any surveillance prior to his arrest, i have no evidence as to his
role in the trafficking scheme – whether he was a supplier to other street dealers
or selling it himself.  the amount of fentanyl, however, was large.  the expert
at trial, whose evidence i found to be credible and reliable, testified that a
heavy user of fentanyl will consume between 1-3 grams of fentanyl per day.  it
is more common to see 0.5 – 1 gram used per day.  he also conceded, however,
that these amounts can vary depending on the user.  with respect to pricing,
0.1 grams (or a typical “hit”) of fentanyl, can cost $20-$40.  0.5 grams would
be $100 to $150, 1 gram would be $200 to $300, and if sold by the ounce (28
grams), the price would be between $1200 and $2000.  the fentanyl in mr.
irwin’s possession was therefore high in monetary value, as well as capable of providing
several weeks of supply to a heavy user.
the case law with respect to possessing two
ounces of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking has developed to attract jail
sentences in the sentencing range suggested by the crown.  this is because, as
our courts have noted, like minded individuals must be deterred and the conduct
of selling this toxin must be denounced.  (see paragraph 17, of
r. v.
ribble,
2021 onca 897
citing with approval the reasons of the trial judge).
in
r. v. disher
2020 onca 710
our court
of appeal imposed an 8-year sentence on mr. disher, who had been found with
42.6 grams of a mixed powder substance containing carfentanil, heroin and
fentanyl.  mr. disher had pled guilty, was on release on other drug charges at
the time of the offence and had a serious and related criminal record spanning
15 years.  when reviewing the caselaw at the time, the court found that a
sentence of 8 years was consistent with that received by offenders similarly
situated to mr. disher, a mid-level recidivist trafficker of heroin adulterated
with fentanyl.  (see paragraph 30)
i must also consider the mitigating
circumstances.  mr. irwin had a relatively positive upbringing prior to
developing his addiction.  he is also open to treatment, and has the support of
family and friends, as outlined in the psr.  i also take into account, as a
further mitigating factor, that he was on lockdown for 65 days and subject to
triple bunking for 68 days as of the february 26, 2025 maplehurst lockdown
report.
while this was not a guilty plea, most of the
case was conceded by mr. irwin, and the ½ day trial was focussed solely on the
possession for the purpose element of the offence.  this saved court time and eliminated
the need for other witnesses to testify.  it was therefore akin to a guilty
plea, in that the possession of the drugs were conceded and only the
trafficking element was left to be proven by the crown.
defence submits that a 8-9 year sentence would
be crushing on mr. irwin, and his desire to pull himself out of his addiction.
i also note that while he has a significant criminal record, he does not have
any prior convictions for trafficking a schedule i substance, nor has he ever
gone to the penitentiary.
in all the circumstances, taking into account
the range of sentence suggested by our higher courts, but also considering mr.
irwin’s personal circumstances, i find that a 78 month sentence, or 6 ½ years is
appropriate.  this sentence also takes into account the harsh conditions at maplehurst,
where according to the records provided by counsel he was subject to lockdowns
and triple bunking i mentioned above.
as an aside, i do note that more than half of
his time in custody at maplehurst thus far was as a result of not attending at
the judgment on this trial and being arrested on my bench warrant.  that time
in custody was therefore not as an individual presumed innocent, but rather, because
he had failed to attend his judgment.  in other words, he was on bail at the
time of his trial and likely would have remained on bail until sentencing,
wherein all are in agreement he would have gone directly to the penitentiary.
by not appearing for his judgment, he subjected himself to further unnecessary
time in the remand facility.
with respect to the fail to attend court count, he
will be sentenced to an additional 1 month consecutive.  he has numerous
breaches of court orders on his record, and had he not been caught by the
police, i doubt he ever would have appeared for his sentencing.
the total sentence, therefore, is 79 months
.  i am told that as of march 5, 2025 (the date of submissions on
sentence), mr. irwin had 218 real days in custody.  as of today’s date, that
number is therefore 230 days.  at 1.5 to 1, that number is 345.  that will be
rounded up to be 12 months of pre-trial custody.
mr. irwin is therefore sentenced to 67
additional months or an additional 5 years and 7 months.
there will be a
section 109
weapons prohibition order for life,
as well as a sample of his dna taken today.  there will also be a forfeiture
order, forfeiting the seized knife and drug paraphernalia.
conclusion
mr.
irwin, as you know, possessing fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking,
particularly a large amount such as this, brings with it stiff consequences.  but
i have considered your personal circumstances, the fact that you are an addict
yourself and your desire to do better and determined that the 6 ½ year sentence
is the appropriate sentence.
this
is your first sentence to the penitentiary, and it is a significant one.  but
it is not one that should be crushing on your ability to do better for
yourself, your family and in particularly your son in the future.
good
luck, sir.
released:  march
18, 2025
justice
b.g. puddington