ontario  court  of
justice
citation:
r.
v. beard
, 2025 oncj 143
date:  2025·02·28
newmarket
between:
his
majesty  the  king
—
and  —
brian
beard
sentencing
evidence and submissions
heard: february 28, 2025.
sentencing: february
28, 2025
ms. kasia batorska.................................................................................
counsel for the crown
mr. lawrence ben-eliezer ...............................................................   counsel
for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction
the york regional police child exploitation
unit identified a suspect who was in possession of files of child sexual abuse
material on a publicly shared online library. a search warrant executed at mr.
beard’s residence in newmarket led to the seizure of several digital devices.
seven of the devices contained images of
identification documents, passports and photos confirming the devices belonged
to mr. beard. there were files containing adult pornography, including
bestiality, urination on women and sexual machines being used on women.
on other devices 831,546 images and videos
were found. 450,903 of those files were reviewed and categorized. of those,
103,737 (3,765 videos and 99,972 images) meet the definition of child sexual
abuse material. a further inspection showed there were child sexual abuse
images and videos in some portion of the remaining files.
the videos that were reviewed and
categorized record almost 540 hours of child sexual abuse. that’s more than 22 full
days. there were also 17 written stories that meet the definition of child
sexual abuse material. the stories described penetrative sexual acts involving
prepubescent children and adults. mr. beard has been collecting the videos and
images since 2013.
the crown proceeded by indictment. mr. beard
pleaded guilty to possession of child pornography s 163.1(4) and making child
pornography available s 163.1(3).
the crown and defence jointly submit that mr.
beard should receive a sentence of 4 years less credit for pre-trial custody (1
day).
aggravating factors
the aggravating factors include:
•
the vast amount of child sexual abuse material
•
the depravity of the images
•
the fact that the abuse involved children
including very young children
•
the collection of child sexual abuse material
over 10 years
mitigating factors
the are three circumstances that mitigate
sentence. mr. beard is almost 65 and he has no criminal record.
the crown concedes that his guilty plea is a
mitigating factor even though it comes just days before his 5-day trial was set
to begin. it does not save the court time as suggested as it’s too late now to
schedule other matters during that period. it does avoid the attendance of
multiple witnesses and i agree with both parties that the plea is mitigating.
a plea is also an expression of remorse.
there’s little evidence of remorse or insight beyond the plea itself, but the
plea is also relevant on that basis.
mr. beard served one day in pre-trial
custody. the joint submission includes statutory credit for that 1 day.
analysis
the images are horrifying. the small
representative sample shared by d.c. carty included a video of a very young
naked girl, her hands bound as she was sexually assaulted by a man and an
animal. another video showed another prepubescent bound girl recorded as she
was penetrated anally and vaginally by an adult male. it’s impossible to
imagine how anyone could want to view such images, much less be so interested
in sexual violence towards children that they amass such a large collection.
for offences that relate to the sexual
exploitation of children, denunciation and deterrence are the central goals of
sentence. the scope of the files possessed and made publicly available by mr.
beard and their nature requires a significant custodial sentence even for a
first offender. the sentence must show mr. beard and everyone in the community
that collecting and making available images of sexual violence towards children
carries severe consequences.
the evidence shows that in each of these
images and videos there is a real child who is being sexually exploited and
abused. for this collection, tens of thousands of children were victimized to
satisfy the interests of mr. beard and others like him. persons who have such a
strong interest in child sexual abuse images fuel a worldwide industry that
continues to create new and ever more egregious forms of abuse.
it takes no imagination to realize the
impact the creation of these images has upon the child victims. mr. beard saw
directly the immediate abuse and exploitation. he knew as a participant in that
community that these images were digitally copied and shared. the children’s
victimization continues long after the event as the abuse is archived on the
internet in perpetuity.
the defence took some exception to the
victim impact statement and affidavit of “lily”, an identified victim, as the
officer in charge had not personally met her. whether or not that specific
statement is considered, the impact of these two offences on the children
involved is plain. mr. beard knew the terrible impact the making of these
images would have on those children, but he just didn’t care.
i take into account the effect these
offences have on the community. making this criminal material available to
others normalizes the sexual abuse of children in the minds of persons like mr.
beard. it desensitizes viewers to the significant harm done to the children
involved. it puts the children in this community at risk.
mr. beard’s strong interest in child sexual
abuse over a decade poses a significant risk to young persons in the community.
it’s been over three years since he was arrested, but there’s no evidence he
has engaged in any counselling in that regard. this sentence must include
orders that protect children and mitigate that risk.
sentence
i agree with both counsel that a significant
custodial sentence is required. the joint submission is within the range on a
guilty plea.
mr. beard is sentenced to 1459 days in
custody, being 4 years less the two days statutory credit requested by both
counsel. that sentence will be on both counts concurrent for a total global
sentence of 1459 days.
there is an order under s 164.2(1) directing
that all devices seized from mr. beard be forfeit to the crown for destruction.
on both charges there will be an order under
s 487.04 directing that mr. beard provide a sample of his dna for registration
on the national databank.
mr. beard is ordered pursuant to 490.012 to
comply with the
sex offender information registry
for 20 years.
there is an order under s 161 for a period
of 15 years on the terms as jointly submitted by both counsel with the
exception of conditions “a” and “c” which were amended during submissions to
read:
•
(a) (prohibited from) attending a public park or
public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can
reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, schoolground,
playground or community centre, except under the
immediate supervision of an adult 21 years of age or
older who is aware of the terms of the s 161 order and is also aware of and has
read the terms of this sentencing order.
•
(c) (prohibited from) having any contact –
including communication by any means – with a person who is under the age of 16
years, unless he does so under the supervision of an adult 21 years of age or
older who is aware of the terms of the s 161 order and is also aware of and has
read the terms of this sentencing order.
delivered: february 28, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel