citation:
r. v. freedland
, 2025 oncj 29
date:  2025·01·17
toronto
region
ontario
court  of  justice
between:
his majesty
the  king
—
and  —
robert
freedland
before
justice michael waby
heard
on 17
th
january, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on january 17, 2025
s. hobson...................................................................................................................
for the crown
ms. freeland............................................................................................................
for the accused
waby m.:
overview
robert freedland is the respondent to an
underlying section 117.05 application brought by the crown.  mr. freedland has
brought an application for abuse of process with respect
to the underlying section 117.05 disposition process and its accompanying
hearing
.
the applicant before the court, mr.
freedland seeks a stay of this proceeding based on an alleged abuse of process
perpetrated by the crown.  the applicant alleges that by commencing this
proceeding the crown has “reneged” on an agreement made at the end of the
applicant’s preliminary hearing for 10 counts of conspiracy to kidnap and that
the proposed section 117.05 hearing is motivated by malice on the part of state
actors following his conviction being overturned by the court of appeal.  a new
trial was ordered following which the crown stayed the charges.
in the alternative, the applicant seeks an
order assigning an “out of town” crown to take carriage of this proceeding.
lastly, the applicant seeks an order to
summons the empanelled jury for his original trial in 2018 to investigate what
the applicant believes was an obstruction of justice that occurred during his
trial.
it is the crown’s submission that there is
either no evidentiary basis or no legal basis to grant the remedies sought and
the crown submits that these applications should be dismissed.
this application was brought and argued
before me this earlier today.  the following are my written reason for my
decision on this application.
summary
given the particular history of this matter,
a brief summary is of assistance.  in january of 2017, police searched the
applicant’s residences and that of a mr. garvin james. in the latter search,
police found a recently purchased mossberg shotgun.  it was registered to the
applicant.  two further firearms, a sks rifle and a scorpio tactical shotgun,
were found at the applicant’s property in kaladar, ontario.  these firearms
were seized pending his trial and then re-seized as part of this application on
september 26, 2023 by the toronto police service.  the crown seeks a forfeiture
of them.
mr. james and the applicant were
subsequently charged with 10 counts of conspiracy to
commit the indictable offence of
kidnapping
.  the applicant’s preliminary hearing took place
in the summer of 2017.  at some point during this hearing, the parties came to
resolution on what offences the applicant would be committed to trial in the
superior court of justice.  that resolution stated, “
in agreeing
that
committal would not be challenged it was agreed that there would not be any
firearms
charge added to the indictment- neither on committal or by the
crown
”.
while a simplified three count indictment
was later placed before the court, it did not include any firearms offences.
during the applicant’s jury trial, mr. james
testified the applicant purchased the mossberg shotgun and ammunition.  they
were the given to mr. james to use in the kidnapping of 10 lawyers targeted by
the applicant.  the applicant was found guilty of one count of counselling to
commit extortion.
on may 3, 2023, the court of appeal
overturned the conviction and ordered a new trial.  on july 28, 2023, the crown
stayed the proceedings.  on september 22, 2023, the toronto police service
commenced this proceeding.  there is presently no indictment before any court
in the province of ontario and the applicant is not currently charged with any
criminal
code
offence.
i have been provided with written materials
by the crown mr. hobson and ms. freidman who is acting on behalf of mr.
freedland as well as a motion record filed by mr. freedland himself which
comprises a number of materials.  in addition to the helpful materials with
which i was provided, counsel supplemented these with oral submissions.
i have reviewed all of the materials and
supporting case law that counsel have provided me with.  counsel agree as the
relevant law that governs an abuse of process application but diverge as to the
decisions that the court should make in light of all of the evidence and
information before the court.
counsel also disagree as to whether either
of the alternate orders that are sought should be granted and whether there is
a basis to do so.
law and analysis
abuse of process
the applicant seeks a stay of proceedings
pursuant to
s.106
of the
courts of justice act
.
section 106
of the
courts of justice act
,
rso 1990, c c.43 states:
stay of proceedings 106
a court, on its own initiative or on motion by any person, whether or
not a party, may stay any proceeding in the court on such terms as are
considered just.
r.s.o. 1990, c. c.43, s. 106
.
section 106 gives the court a broad discretion stay proceedings, unfettered
by any specific test.
hester v. canada (national revenue)
,
2008 canlii 6193 (on
scdc)
at para
15
.
the onus is on the party seeking a
stay to establish that the stay is justified.
blue note mining inc. v. canzinco ltd.,
2008
canlii 43581 (on sc)
at para
8
.
an order for a stay-of-proceedings is “the
most drastic remedy” available under the law, one that “permanently halts the
prosecution” and, in so doing, frustrates “the truth-seeking function of the
trial” and deprives the “public of the opportunity to see justice done on the
merits.”  only in the rarest of occasions – “the clearest of cases” – will this
remedy be warranted.
r. v. babos
, 2014 (canlii) (scc) at 30
r. v. regan
,
2002 scc 12
at 53
r. v. o’connor
, 1995 canlii (scc) at 68
these circumstances ordinarily fall into two
categories: (i) the ‘main’ category, in which the state conduct compromises the
fairness of the accused’s trial; and, (ii) the ‘residual’ category, in which
the state conduct undermines the integrity of the judicial process but does not
impinge upon trial fairness.  for either category, a three-part test determines
whether the remedy is appropriate.
the prejudice to the
accused’s fair trial rights or the integrity of the justice system must be “manifested,
perpetuated, or aggravated” by either the trial or its outcome. no alternate
remedy capable of redressing the prejudice exists; and, where uncertainty
remains regarding the appropriateness of a stay at steps (a) and (b), above, a
balancing occurs in relation to the interests militating in favour of the stay,
such as denouncing misconduct and preserving the integrity of the justice
system, against society’s interest in having a final adjudication on the
merits.
r. v. babos,
supra
at 31-32
r. v. o’connor,
supra
at 71, 73
in relation to the
residual category, the remedy of a stay-of-proceedings will ordinarily – although
not always – be invoked to cure state misconduct.  occasions where the
integrity of the justice system is impugned in the absence of state misconduct
may include repeatedly prosecuting an accused for the same offence following
successive trials in which the juries were hung and using the criminal process
solely for the purposes of collecting a civil debt.
r. v. babos,
supra
at 37
r. v. waugh
1985 canlii 3557 (ns ca)
at 33-37
during the applicant’s criminal trial, the
crown entered into an agreement with him in which mr. freedland agreed to
committal to stand trial in exchange for the crown agreeing not to pursue
criminal firearms charges against.  no criminal firearms charges formed part of
mr. freedland’s trial.
it is the position of the applicant that his
understanding of the agreement he made with the crown was that he would face no
jeopardy at all with respect to the firearms and that this extends to the
proposed 117.05 hearing.  while it is the applicant’s position that he may have
been represented by counsel at the point in time he entered into this agreement,
he submits it is reasonable for him to be of the view that a reasonable person
similarly situated would reach the same conclusion as him.
the applicant admits that the crown has
reneged on its promise and this violates fundamental principles of justice and
amounts to an abuse of process.  furthermore, the applicant contends that the
timing of the section 117.05 application proximate to the decision taken to
stay the charges against him raises the reasonable spectre that section 117.05
application is motivated by malice on the part of the state and that this also
would clearly amount to amount to abuse of process.
the applicant filed several formal
complaints against the trial crown, the trial judge and police officers
involved in his original trial in june 2023.  in july of 2023, the crown made a
decision to stay the charges against the applicant.  in september 2023, the
underlying section 117.05 application was brought.
simply put, it is the applicant’s position
that the section 117.05 hearing is being pursued has some form of vendetta to
compensate for the frustration that he submits agents of the state feel as a
result of the criminal prosecution against him being discontinued after a re-trial
was ordered and his conviction was overturned.
on my review of the agreement reached as
between the crown and the applicant at his trial, a plain reading of it makes
clear that the crown undertook not to pursue criminal firearm charges against
mr. freedland at his trial.  this undertaking was given and honoured.  within
the context of the criminal matter that was then before the courts and to which
mr. freedland was a party, the extent of the agreement is clear on applying the
ordinary, plain and natural meaning of the language used.
i agree with mr. hobson for the crown that
an agreement on what charges would be included on an indictment cannot
reasonably be interpreted as immunity from
any
future proceedings or
sanctions.
i appreciate that if is mr. freedland’s
current position that he understood that the agreement really meant that he
would be subject to no jeopardy whatsoever with respect to the 3 firearms that
are in issue but i am satisfied that there was not then, nor is there now, a
reasonable basis for him to reach a contrary conclusion.
nothing in the agreement and importantly the
context within which it was reached would have led a reasonable person to
conclude that they would be rendered exempt from, for example, the regulatory
regime applicable to firearms.
i also note that at the time of the original
conviction and the corresponding lifetime weapons prohibition order that was
imposed this issue was not raised as a concern by the application but is raised
before the court for the first time on this application.
the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
zeolkowski,
scc 20395 and the relevant statutes make it clear that
the firearm disposition process and its related regime do not equate with a
person being accused of a criminal offence.  nor do the provisions affect the
applicant’s liberty interests.  the “jeopardy” that the applicant is subject to
is a section 117.05 hearing the outcome of which cannot be known and which has
yet to be determined. in short, the applicant argues that the jeopardy is the
process in and of itself.
i do not find that there is any basis to
conclude that pursuing a properly conducted section 117.05 hearing represents
any reneging of the original agreement that the applicant and crown entered
into and as such, i find that there is no abuse of process as alleged.
the section 117.05 is a distinct process
that is to be conducted impartially and according to the governing principles
and rules of evidence.  while there may be evidential connections with the
original trial, it is not and is not intended to be a re-litigation of the
criminal issues at any previous trial.
i now turn to the timing of the filing of
the section 117.05 application.  i can appreciate that to the applicant there
may be sense of frustration that this process was initiated relatively
proximate to the decision to stay the charges against him.
i note that there was approximately a two-month
gap between the decision to stay the charges and the decision to bring the section
117.05 application in respect of the 3 firearms.   i note that the firearms
were still in the possession of the police at this time.  it may seem
self-evident to the applicant that the section 117.05 hearing is simply
motivated by malice but there is no evidence before me to support such a
conclusion as being with foundation.
the section 117.05 process is one focused
principally on issues of safety, not punitive sanctions.  if it is not
desirable in the interests of safety of the person from whom an item is seized,
or any other person, a court can order the forfeiture of the items and impose
an accompanying weapons prohibition.
the two-month time period between the
decision stay the charges and to initiate the section 117.05 hearing does not
strike me as consistent with a rush to act malevolently against the applicant and
seems consistent with a reasonable period of time to make a balanced decision.
i am sure that for the applicant this seems more than a coincidence but such
speculation on his part provides no basis for me to conclude that merely
initiating the section 117.05 hearing amounts to an abuse of process.
applications in the alternative
out-of-town crown
the applicant seeks an order from the court
that if a section 117.05 hearing is to proceed that an “out-of-town crown”
should have carriage of the matter.  specifically, this would mean a crown attorney
from somewhere other than the toronto region.
the basis for this application is that mr.
freedland has lodged formal complaints against the toronto crown attorney who
prosecuted him and an alleged victim of the original charges against mr.
freedland was a former toronto crown attorney.
ms. friedman, on behalf of mr. freedland,
submits that perception of fairness is as important as actual fairness and that
the interests of justice militate in favor of such an order in this case.  she
further submits that there is the perception of a conflict of interest in this
case among toronto crown attorneys.  this is a submission mr. hobson roundly
rejects.
mr. hobson, for the crown, opposes this application.
he submits that there is no evidential basis to support the making of such
order.  mr. hobson further submits that any such order would have adverse
administrative and operational implications for the crown in both toronto and
the region from which any alternate crown attorney was sourced.  he also
submits that there would be a danger in the court making such an order because
of what would be termed the risk of a “floodgates argument” in that individuals
before the court would subsequently be more likely to seek to influence the
assignment of crown attorneys in cases to which they are a party.
it is clear from the materials that i have
reviewed that mr. freedland has profound concerns he is the victim of a
conspiracy by a number of state actors.  this list includes crown attorneys
from the toronto region as well as his original trial judge and a number of
police officers.  it is not my role or purpose on this application to address
the merits or lack thereof of those allegations.
however, i am of the view that the perception
that mr. freedland holds of state actors working against him is one he
legitimately believes and that proceedings connect him to at least two current
or former toronto crowns.  it is his genuine perception and his subjective
belief that the fairness of any section 117.05 hearing is dependent upon a
crown attorney from outside of toronto region conducting this matter.
i appreciate the merit and logic to mr.
hobson’s submissions.  an individual before the court cannot simply be allowed
to dictate which crown is assigned to his or her case.  crown attorneys are
ministers of justice and presumed to act as such.  i also appreciate that
perception is not the same as reality.
nevertheless, mr. freedland does not seek to
impose a particular or individual crown attorney on any section 117.05
proceedings or to exclude any specific individual.  his request is for any one
of the approximately 700 remaining crown attorneys in the province of ontario
to conduct this matter given the history of his proceedings before the courts.
while it is not determinative and is
inevitably case specific, the perception of an individual before the courts
that their matter is not proceeding fairly is an issue that the courts are
obliged to take seriously.  it is inevitably a contextual analysis and i do not
believe that a decision predicated on the specific facts of this case would
determine the outcome of such a request in another case and thereby risk
creating a problematic flood of similar outcomes.
i appreciate that crown resources are not
unlimited and they are frequently stretched to breaking point.  however, i am
not persuaded that assigning one out-of-town crown attorney for the limited
purposes of conducting a section 117.05 hearing would place an unreasonable or
inappropriate burden upon the crown’s resources.   while i accept mr hobson’s
submissions that there would inevitably be some impact on crown scheduling
operations, this would seem to me to be to be both modest and manageable.
within the specific context of this
application and their somewhat atypical history, i am satisfied that the
interests of justice are in favour of me ordering that a crown attorney from
somewhere other than the toronto region is to conduct the future section 117.05
proceedings.  i am of the view that both the appearance of justice and the
interests of justice in this case would be best served by such an order.  this
is not to impute any bad faith on the part of any of the crown attorneys in
toronto and nor should any such imputation be construed.
jurors to be summonsed to
investigate obstruction of justice
the second order in the alternative that the
applicant seeks is an order from the court summonsing the jurors from the
applicant’s original criminal trial to testify at the section 117.05 hearing.
the basis for this application rests upon
the applicant’s belief that the crown anticipates seeking the court to draw
adverse inferences against him at the section 117.05 hearing based upon the
criminal conviction which was subsequently overturned.
based on this premise, the applicant relies
upon a phone call he indicates he received in 2024 from an anonymous person who
did not disclose their name and who apparently blocked their telephone number.
this individual claimed to be a friend of a juror at the applicant’s former
criminal trial and this anonymous person claimed that they were told that the
jury had been provided with a prejudicial photograph of the applicant that was
not adduced as an exhibit at his trial.
the applicant seeks to counter any such
adverse inference that the crown seeks at the section 117.05 hearing by having
his former jurors made available for cross-examination as part of the
disposition hearing and to explore whether an obstruction of justice occurred
in his previous trial.
section 649
of the
criminal code
allows for the questioning of jurors regarding their deliberations in only two
instances:
a. an investigation under s.139(s) in
relation to a juror
b.
giving evidence in criminal proceedings in relation to a s.139(2) offence.
mr. hobson opposes this application and
submits that there is no evidential basis upon which to make such an order and
that the only information before the court is effectively “double hearsay”
which is incapable of being tested for its reliability or credibility.  he
further submits that it is not the role of this court to instigate such
criminal investigations and that the jealously guarded sanctity of the jury
room should only be subject to the limited intrusion of section 649 of the
code
in the clearest of circumstances.
mr. hobson further submitted that while he
would not be seeking to bind any colleague with eventual carriage of this
matter, he did not foresee a likelihood of the crown seeking this court to draw
an adverse inference from an overturned criminal conviction.  while he did
anticipate that there may be evidential issues from the previous criminal trial
that may be of relevance to the disposition hearing, he quite rightly, in my
view, did not anticipate that the crown would seek to go behind the overturned
conviction nor the crowns’ subsequent decision to stay the matter against the
applicant.
given the anticipated position of the crown
with respect to the concern that the applicant had it seems that, following
crown submissions, there would not be a foundation for the applicant’s concern
and therefore there would not be a basis for the order he seeks to summons his
former jurors.
in what i hope is the unlikely event that
the crown position changed on this issue, it would be open to applicant to
renew his application.  however, any such application would require a clear and
legitimate foundation as well as credible evidence in support of it.
on the basis of the information currently
before me, both a foundation for the application and any credible or reliable
evidence supporting it are absent.  i shall not make any order for the
summonsing of the applicant’s former jurors.
summary
in summary and for the foregoing reasons:
i.
i
dismiss the application with respect to an abuse of process;
ii.
in
the interest of justice, a crown attorney from somewhere other than the toronto
region will conduct the 117.05 hearing.
iii.
there
is no basis to grant an order summonsing the applicant’s former jurors to
testify at the firearms disposition hearing and no such order will be made.
i shall now address with the parties the
time estimate and scheduling arrangements for the section 117.05 hearing
released:  17
th
january, 2025
signed: justice m waby