ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. d.m.,
2025 oncj 118
date:
2025 03 03
court
file no.:  pembroke 23-37200165
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
dm
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on january 28, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on march 3, 2025
goher irfan.......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
vanessa garcia........................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
richardson j.:
introduction
the issue in this case is whether dm should be
granted a conditional discharge for two counts of assault against am, his
former intimate partner.
dm was charged with:
a)
assaulting am
between april 1, 2023 and april 16, 2023, contrary to
section 266
of the
criminal code
,
b)
assaulting am
with a weapon, to wit, a hanger between january 1, 2015 and april 16, 2023
contrary to
section 267
(a) of the
criminal code
,
c)
assaulting am
with a weapon, to wit, a cable wire, between january 1, 2022 and april 16, 2023
contrary to
section 267
(a) of the
criminal code
,
d)
assaulting am on
january 1, 2023 contrary to
section 266
of the
criminal
code
, and
e)
uttering a
threat to cause death to am between january 1, 2022 and april 16, 2023,
contrary to
section 264.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
.
on july 2, 2024, after a two-day trial in march
2024, i found dm guilty of assaulting am on january 1, 2023 (paragraph 3(d)
above) and assaulting am between april 1 and april 16, 2023 (paragraph 3(a)
above).
i acquitted dm on the other charges, including
two more serious charges of assault with weapon.
with respect to the january 1, 2023 offence, i
found that dm consumed a significant amount of alcohol during a new year’s eve
party which the couple attended in quebec.  am was the designated driver and
drove the couple home.  he was very intoxicated.  the weather was bad.   am was
driving slowly.  he pushed her arm repeatedly on the drive home.  the pushing caused
her to veer into another lane.  the pushing stopped when he fell asleep.
with respect to the april 1 to april 16, 2023
offence, i found that dm pushed am into a fridge or cupboard in the kitchen of
their home.  the pushing caused a bruise to am’s arm that was photographed by
police on april 16, 2023.
at paragraphs 122 to 123 of the trial judgment, i
noted the following about the environment at am and dm’s home at the time this
offence was committed:
it is clear that by april 2023,
the relationship was over.  the parties were living separate and apart under
the same roof.  dm’s drinking and smoking annoyed am.  he called her “bitch”.
she called him “asshole”.  they belittled and provoked one another.  they had
not slept together since january.  they were buying their own food and storing
it in their own fridge, jealously guarding it from one another like a dog
jealously guards a bone. there were discussions about ending the relationship
and going their separate ways.  am desperately wanted him out; dm stubbornly
refused to leave.  in am’s eyes, dm was a drinking dope-smoking loser who did
not contribute.  dm, on the other hand, as evidenced by the number of times he
testified that he said to himself “yeah whatever”, was at minimum, the poster
child for passive aggressiveness.
the case reminds me of the 1989
movie
the war of the roses
.  the parties should be ashamed that they
allowed this to happen.  they should be ashamed that they exposed am’s children
to their behaviour.
the pre-sentence report
a pre-sentence report was prepared.  it is dated september 5, 2024.  it
reveals the following:
a)
dm is now 46
years of age.
b)
he is an only
child.  he was raised by his mother and his grandparents.  he never knew his
father.  he reported a “good” childhood.  he resided with his mother and his
grandparents until he was 6.  at that point, his mother moved out and he and
his grandparents moved to quebec.  he played sports growing up.
c)
when he was 16,
he returned to live with his mother.
d)
he did not do well
in school and left after grade 10.
e)
he had several
jobs until, in his 20s, he ultimately landed a job in a government office.  he
was employed there for about eight years.  after that, he went to work for a
major telecommunications company as a network technician and he has been so
employed for 18 years.
f)
he
expressed concern to the author of the pre-sentence report about the effect a
criminal record may have on his employment.
g)
he had a
relationship with a woman in 2002.  he has a daughter from that union.  he had
regular access for about ten years, until the access was terminated.  he did
not have any contact with his daughter after that until recently, when he
reconnected with her.  in submissions, defence counsel told me that his
daughter is in post-secondary education in prince edward island.
h)
he reported
meeting the victim in 2014.  they dated for three years.  then they started
cohabiting.  he denies having contact with her since the charges arose.
i)
he knows
that his use of marihuana is problematic.  he stated that while he does not use
when he is at work or driving, he uses marihuana as soon as he gets home from
work.  i note that i heard evidence at trial that is consistent with marihuana
use being a problem.  he told the author of the pre-sentence report that he is
prepared to take a substance abuse program.
j)
he denies
a problem with alcohol.  his mother told the author of the pre-sentence report,
however that “when he drinks, he drinks hard and fast”.
k)
at the time that
the pre-sentence report was completed, he was in the process of completing the
partner assault response program through new directions in ottawa.  as i will
discuss below, he has now completed that program.
l)
dm’s
mother described him as a thoughtful and caring person.  his cousin, cp told
the author of the pre-sentence report that he was trustworthy, hard working and
dependable.
m)
dm currently lives with his
mother.
defence materials
the matter was adjourned, on consent, for several months to allow dm to
complete the partner assault program.
defence
counsel filed a report from the partner assault program that serves the ottawa
area, new directions.  the report was completed december 17, 2024.  it reveals
the following:
a)
under the
heading of acceptance, the report indicates:
overall, [dm] took
responsibility for pushing his partner on two occasions but denied or
downplayed the physical effects of bruising and the potential emotional effects
of being pushed and punched while [s]he was driving.
b)
he admitted that
the verbal exchanges between he and am would frighten and scare her children,
who were living with them.
c)
dm arrived on
time and participated in all twelve sessions.  he was quiet during group
sessions but cooperative and respectful.  he completed homework assignments
satisfactorily.
the
crown would later submit that the report indicates that dm has issues with
insight.
the
court must be careful with respect to how it interprets this report.  according
to the report, the facilitator of the program scored dm as a level 2, “meets
minimum standards”, which is below level 3, “satisfactory”, and level 4,
“excellent”.  in coming to this conclusion and discussing dm’s level of
acceptance and his minimization of intimate partner violence, the facilitator
pointed out that dm continued to deny hitting am with a hanger or a cord and
telling her that he was watching crime shows to learn how to kill her.
dm
cannot be faulted for this.  these allegations form the subject matter of the
other charges of which i found dm not guilty.  the presumption of innocence
remaining intact, he cannot be expected to accept responsibility for those
facts and he cannot be penalized for failing to do so.
i
expect that the program may have relied on a synopsis of the offences prepared
by the police as opposed to the judgment of this court.  if they did, they
relied on unproven allegations and they should not have done so in this case.
in
my view it is clear from the report that dm accepted responsibility for the
offences of which he was found guilty.  that is all he can be expected to do.
moreover,
the report also indicates that he admitted responsibility for other things which
were not before me, including punching a wall, table or door, throwing and
breaking objects when angry and trying to keep a partner away from family or
friends.  these are things that dm volunteered he has done which are over and
above the charges before the court.
he
also ultimately admitted two elements of his behaviour towards am about which i
did hear evidence:  spending family money on things like alcohol and drugs and
yelling and calling am names.
all
in all, when i look at the facts of the offences of which i found dm guilty and
the things that he admitted to the facilitator of the program, i suspect he was
deserving of a higher score in the area of acceptance.  he cannot be penalized
for not accepting allegations of which he was not found guilty.
defence
counsel also filed a letter from dm’s mother, km.  she stated that she has been
battling with depression and anxiety since her partner died and dm has been a
great help and support to her.  he also assists in supporting her financially
as she is on a fixed income.
defence
counsel filed a letter from bm, who is a friend of km and the superintendent of
the building where dm and km reside.  she confirmed that dm supports km
emotionally and financially.  she stated that she has “almost daily” interaction
with him.  she essentially described the offences as out of character.
defence
counsel filed a letter from nm, who has been a friend with dm for about 15
years.  they are also co-workers.  he stated that dm was of great support to
him when he lost his mother. he also reported that when they were travelling
outside of canada, he became very sick and dm was of great support then.
defence
counsel filed a letter from cp, dm’s cousin.  as i have set out above, cp also
spoke to the author of the pre-sentence report.  cp reported that dm was a
“loving and caring friend and family member”.  she considers him like a
brother.  he supported her through her divorce.
letters of support must be treated with
caution.  intimate partner violence offences are committed in private and out
of the public eye.  they are committed by otherwise pro-social and upstanding
citizens.  this case is no different.  albeit in the context of a sexual
assault case, this point was made well by justice antonio of the alberta court
of queen’s bench in
r. v. shrivastava
2019 abqb 663
at paragraph
87
where
she noted that placing too much weight on ““good character” can undermine the
denunciative and deterrent functions of criminal sentences”.
defence counsel submissions
defence
counsel advised that dm earns a gross income of $85,000 a year.
divorce
proceedings with am, the victim, are ongoing.
defence counsel submitted that the appropriate
sentence in this case is a conditional discharge and two years probation.
defence counsel indicated that dm is amenable to
counselling and is prepared to do counselling for alcohol and substance abuse.
defence counsel expressed concern with the
effect that a criminal record may have on dm’s employment.
crown submissions
crown counsel submitted that the appropriate
sentence is a conditional sentence of imprisonment for 60 days to be followed
by 18 months of probation.
crown counsel submitted that these offences were
more serious because they were committed in front of the victim’s children.  crown
counsel also argued that dm should not be waiting for a probation order to get
going with respect to counselling for alcohol and substance abuse.
analysis
section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
a)
to denounce unlawful conduct in the harm done to victims or to the
community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
b)
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
and
f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
establishes the fundamental principle of sentencing: “a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.”
section 718.2
of the
criminal code
sets out “other sentencing principles”:
a court that imposes a
sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles:
(a)
a sentence should be
increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without limiting
the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence
that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race,
national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or
physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, or
on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
(iii.2)
evidence that the offence was
committed against a person who, in the performance of their duties and
functions, was providing health services, including personal care services,
(iv)
evidence
that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence
that the offence was committed while the offender was subject to a conditional
sentence order made under section 742.1 or released on parole, statutory
release or unescorted temporary absence under the
corrections and
conditional release act
, and
(vii)
evidence
that the commission of the offence had the effect of impeding another person
from obtaining health services, including personal care services,
shall be deemed to be aggravating
circumstances;
(b)
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c)
where
consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly
long or harsh;
(d)
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
section 718.201
of the
criminal code
requires
the court to craft a sentence that reflects society’s disdain for intimate
partner violence offences that are perpetrated against vulnerable women.  it
states:
a court that imposes a sentence in respect of an offence that
involved the abuse of an intimate partner shall consider the increased
vulnerability of female persons who are victims, giving particular attention to
the circumstances of aboriginal female victims.
the test for granting a conditional discharge is
set out in
section 730
of the
criminal code
.
the court must determine
whether a conditional discharge is in the interests of the offender and whether
it is not contrary to the public interest.
a conditional discharge is almost always in the
interests of the offender.  a conditional discharge allows an accused person to
say that they do not have a criminal record.  this can have important
ramifications with respect to employment.
it is well developed in our law that sentencing
is a delicate and highly individualized process.  as my colleague justice march
has often said, “no two offenders are alike”.  see also
r. v. parranto
2021
scc 46
and
r. v. lacasse
2015 scc 64
.
i consider the following mitigating factors:
a)
dm has secure employment.
b)
dm has completed a course of counselling for intimate partner
violence in advance of his sentencing.
c)
dm has insight with respect to the possible presence of a problem
with marihuana and has indicated a willingness to go to treatment.
d)
dm does not have a criminal record.
e)
dm has good family and community support.
i consider the following aggravating factors:
a)
this is an intimate partner offence.  am was in a vulnerable
position.
b)
as the crown has pointed out, although dm has insight with respect
to the possible presence of a substance abuse problem, he has not taken any
steps to address that problem.
it is well established that denunciation and
deterrence (both specific and general) are the paramount sentencing
considerations in cases of intimate partner violence.  this is essentially
recognized by parliament in the statutory provisions i have quoted from above.
it is also recognized in a multitude of appellate
cases from ontario and other provinces:
r. v. inwood
(1989),
1989 canlii 263 (on ca)
, 48 ccc
(3d) 173 (ont. c.a.);
r. v. boucher
(2004),
2004 canlii 17719 (on ca)
, 186 ccc (3d) 479 (ont. c.a.);
r. v. rahanam
2008, onca 1
;
r. v. dustyhorn
2019 skca 93
;
r.
v. butcher
2020 nsca 50
r. v. somers
2021 bcca 205
.
while those cases involved facts that are far
more violent and aggravating than the case before me, the principles expressed in
them with respect to sentencing in intimate partner violence cases must be
heeded.
that is not to say that there can never be an
intimate partner violence case where a discharge is appropriate.  in
r. v.
khanna,
, oj 2192 (ont. c.a.)
, the ontario court of appeal was
concerned with a case where the offender was found guilty by a jury on one
count of assault.  they acquitted the offender on four other counts.  the court
found it was impossible to determine the facts on which the jury convicted the
offender, other than it was a very minor assault.  the trial judge imposed a
small fine.
when the matter came on before the court of
appeal, the victim had moved to another country to practice medicine and the
offender intended to move to the united states to practice dentistry.
the court of appeal held at paragraphs 7 and 8:
this was a minor
assault which occurred in the context of a most unhappy marriage. the appellant
and complainant developed an intense dislike for each other and their
respective families shortly after this arranged marriage was made. both
resorted to physical violence on occasion. apart from each other, the
complainant and the appellant are both valuable members of the community.
together they are trouble for each other.
given the present
circumstances of the appellant and complainant and the jury's verdict, we think
an absolute discharge is an appropriate disposition.
in
r. v daley
1997 canlii 26116
(ns sc)
, moir, j. was sitting as a summary conviction appeal court where the trial
judge found that it was never in the public interest to grant a discharge in an
intimate partner violence case.
at paragraphs 9 through 12, his
lordship made the following observations concerning the problem of intimate
partner violence, observations which i note have not changed despite the
passage of almost 30 years between this decision and the case before me:
in my
opinion, there is no such thing as a minor assault where the parties are
partners and the perpetrator is the male partner. we have all come to
understand the sociological implications of male aggression against wives or
female partners. we are beginning to understand the psychological effects upon
children of violence perpetrated by either spouse upon the other.
at least 10% of
canadian women have been assaulted by their male partners. as of 1990, on
average a woman suffered such assaults 35 times before the police were called.
the prevalence of assaults upon women by their male partners lead us to
recognize the profound sociological under-pinnings of this common event, that
is, the use of male physical strength in the historical disadvantage of women
through dominance of them by men.
studies have
shown that boys who observe their fathers assaulting their mothers are far more
likely to batter their own female partners in later life. the behaviourist
conclusion that spousal assault is learned, constitutes only a superficial
appreciation of the psychological impact this conduct has on children.
statistics indicate serious conduct problems are 17 times more apparent in boys
who observed family violence, that such are 10 times more apparent in girls who
have had the experience and that in one city fifty percent of young offenders
had experienced family violence. these statistics shed greater light on the
implications of spousal violence in child psychology. we are coming to
recognize that such violence constitutes an attack not only on who the child is
but also on the very fact of the child's existence. such profound rejection is
at the heart of many childhood and adolescent disturbances.
for those
reasons, it is right to say that general deterrence must be emphasized
"with offences such as this".
after reading this passage, one might
think that his lordship would be in agreement with the trial judge.  not so.
his lordship further stated at paragraphs 14 through 20:
almost since parliament
established conditional and absolute discharges as an instrument for dealing
with criminal conduct, appellate courts recognized that discharges are
available in the right circumstances for serious criminal misconduct and are
not restricted to trivial cases or to strict liability offences where there was
no real criminal intent. examples of those appellate decisions include
regina
v. fallofield
(1973),
1973 canlii 1412 (bc ca)
, 13 ccc (2d) 450 (b.c.c.a.) and
regina v.
sanchez-pino
(1973),
1973 canlii 794 (on ca)
, 11 c.c.c. (2d) 53 (o.c.a.).
section 736
of the
criminal
code
holds out the possibility of a discharge so long as the accused is an
individual, there is no minimum penalty and the maximum penalty is less than 14
years’ imprisonment. those restrictions are broad enough to cover very serious
offences including some which have special sociological implications. in
providing for the prerequisite that the judge must be satisfied a discharge is
not contrary to the public interest, parliament did not delegate to the judges
authority to carve out entire offences or categories of offence. in my opinion,
each case must be assessed in the particular with much weight against a
discharge where, as here, the public interest emphasizes general deterrence. i
refer to the sixth principle set out in
fallofield
at p. 455 of the
c.c.c. text and to the first and second full paragraphs at p. 59 of the c.c.c.
report of
sanchez-pino
.
to hold, as i take the
provincial court judge to have done, that a conditional discharge is always
contrary to public interest in cases of spousal assault is, in my opinion, to
decline a responsibility the elected branch of government has imposed upon the
judiciary. for example: some people come to court with unfair disadvantage due
to race and culture or from a materialistic environment where the frustrations
of economic disadvantage lead to misconduct. the courts will look for
opportunities to make the field more level. to preclude discharges for entire
categories of offence is to disavow an instrument that could be used
judiciously to address other important public interests. (parenthetically, i am
not suggesting that spousal assault is a particular problem of the poor or of
any culture. in fact, we know that the problem is prevalent in all parts of
society.)
as a further example, i note
that studies have shown males who abuse are often responsive to counselling
even where counselling is received under compulsion. that hopeful fact
indicates that in cases where the man has a strong interest in avoiding
conviction, the conditional discharge could be the best instrument to break a
cycle of abuse where the possibility of avoiding a conviction would motivate a
positive response under compelled counselling. where the sociological problem
may well be served by discharge, it is wrong to preclude the instrument on the
very ground of that same sociological problem. (parenthetically, my observation
in this regard has nothing to do with remorse. genuine remorse is often felt
and expressed by a man after he beats his female partner, but he does it
again.)
also by way of example, there
are cases, and this is one, where the facts are somewhat removed from the
social problem of male control through repetitive violence. while there is no
such thing in our time as a trivial spousal assault, the public interest in deterring
cycles of male violence against wives or partners must be addressed in a
different light where the incident was isolated, the assault was physically
minor, and the victim rather than the perpetrator had been the perpetrator in
the past. the rule stated by the provincial court judge is preclusive of any
particular assessments such as this.
these are just three examples
of cases where it would be especially important to consider particular
circumstances on a request for a discharge in respect of a spousal assault or,
as here, on a joint recommendation for such. these are merely examples pointing
out the need for pragmatic assessment of the public interest rather than
determination of that prerequisite by rigid rule.
in conclusion, it was an error
in principle to hold that the public interest is preclusive of a discharge in
all cases of spousal assault. rather, the social problem of assaults by men
against wives or partners demands that general deterrence be given much weight
in assessing the circumstances of a spousal assault to determine whether a
conditional discharge is contrary to the public interest.
in the case before me, i am troubled by
the fact that there were two assaults.  other members of the public were put at
risk by dm’s conduct in pushing am while she was driving home on  a snowy new
year’s eve.  he is lucky that this did not result in a tragedy. in the second
assault, am suffered bruising to her arm which was photographed by police.  there
was no long-term injury to her.
while dm has started to acknowledge his
offending behaviour, he has more work to do.  in my view, he needs counselling
for substance abuse.  he has identified the use of marihuana as a problem.
alcohol was involved in the first offence.  in fact, on the evidence before me
he fell asleep due to the effects it had on him after committing it.
these assaults took place, in the words
of our court of appeal
in
daley
, in the course of a “most unhappy”
relationship.
this case is very close. had i found dm
guilty of one of the more serious assaults with which he was charged, a
discharge would not be under consideration and the crown’s submission for a
conditional sentence of imprisonment might have been more favourably received.
i am satisfied that the paramount sentencing
principles of denunciation and deterrence do not render a conditional discharge
contrary to the public interest.
i am satisfied that along with the
experience of being arrested, charged, having gone to trial and having awaited
the outcome of this case since april 2023, the two years of probation (with
counselling) which i will impose as part of the conditional discharge are
sufficient denunciation and deterrence for dm’s crimes.
released:  march 3, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson