warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code
.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)   any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)   two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)   at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)   on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  offence
— (1)  every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario
court of justice
citation:
r. v. moore
, 2025 oncj 441
date:
2025 08 22
court
file no.:  23-91109493-01
central
east region - newmarket
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
keyron moore
before
justice m. townsend
submissions
on sentence heard on june 26, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on august 22, 2025
k. batorska.......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
a. sobcuff............................................................
counsel for the accused keyron moore
townsend j.:
on march 13, 2025, i convicted mr. moore of a
number of serious offences. the facts underlying those convictions are
extensively outlined in the judgment on trial (
r. v. moore
,
o.j.
no. 2415
) and i do not intend to go over those facts in detail in this
judgment.
at the outset of submissions on sentence, it was
brought to my attention that with respect to count #7, the wording of that
count in the
criminal code
prohibits a finding of guilt on that count
together with a finding of guilt on count #2. based on a fair reading of those
counts in connection with one another, and the facts underlying those findings,
the proper disposition on count #7 is to have it marked dismissed. the
information will be changed to reflect this new disposition.
as such, mr. moore is sentenced on the
following counts:
count #2 – that
mr. moore did use a firearm to wit a handgun in kidnapping a.t., with intent to
cause her to be confined against her will, contrary to section 279, subsection
(1.1), clause (a.1) of the
criminal code
.
count #3 – that
mr. moore did, without lawful authority confine a.t., contrary to
section 279
,
subsection (2)
of the
criminal code
.
count #4 – that
mr. moore did, in committing a sexual assault on a.t., carry a weapon, namely a
firearm, contrary to section 272, subsection (1), clause (a) of the
criminal
code
.
count #8 – that
mr. moore did discharge a firearm, while being reckless as to the life or
safety of another person, contrary to section 244.2, subsection (1), clause (b)
of the
criminal code
.
exhibits on sentence
criminal record of mr. moore
mr. moore comes before the court with a prior
criminal history. while none of the offences included on mr. moore’s criminal
record rise to the calibre of the offences upon which i found him guilty, he
does not come before me with a clean slate.
mr. moore’s criminal history is relatively dated
and stems primarily from convictions in 2012. this will be his first
significant jail sentence. he is alleged to have committed further criminal
offences while on bail for these offences, and there was an occurrence in toronto
that pre-dates these offences. i understand that some outstanding newmarket
charges have been withdrawn, and he has been convicted of some toronto offences
and is awaiting sentence for those.
victim impact statement of the complainant
(a.t.)
the victim impact statement (vis) of the
complainant a.t. was filed as an exhibit on sentence. in that vis, a.t.
reiterated what she testified to at the trial. that the events she endured
throughout these offences were traumatic, terrifying, physically painful, and
emotionally draining. among other things she stated the following that is worth
repeating:
i don’t go outside
alone. the fear is too overwhelming. i feel like i have a target on my back,
like someone is always watching, waiting for the right moment. my heart races
at the thought of being approached, followed, or taken.
every time i see
headlights in the dark, i feel like i am back in that moment. my body reacts
before my mind can catch up. panic sets in, my breath becomes shallow, and i
feel like i am seconds away from being dragged away. …
even inside my
home, where i should feel safe, i don’t. my mind plays tricks on me. i see
people trying to get in, trying to force open the door, trying to climb onto my
balcony even though i know it’s impossible. the fear is so real that i find
myself waiting for something to happen. every sound feels like a threat. my
heart jumps at the smallest noise, and i have to remind myself that i am safe,
but it never feels like i am. …
i feel
disconnected from everyone. i don’t know how to explain what i’m going through,
and even if i could, i don’t know if they would understand. i keep people at a
distance because i don’t want them to see how much this has broken me. i don’t
want their pity. …
everything feels
meaningless compared to the trauma i am living with. my brain is stuck in
survival mode. i live in a constant state of fear. even when i know i’m safe,
my body refuses to believe it. …
this didn’t just
happen to me once it is happening to me every single day. no matter where i go,
no matter what i do, the fear is there. and i don’t know how to make it stop.
the trauma i
experienced left lasting physical effects that i still feel every day. although
my injuries have healed, my body continues to carry the impact in ways that
most people don’t understand.
the pain was
intense, and even though the external wounds are gone, the effects remain. the
forceful impact on my knees, hands, and feet has led to lingering joint pain,
stiffness, and sensitivity. the pressure and repeated blows may have caused
nerve damage, leading to numbness, tingling, and unpredictable pain in my
extremities. even now, holding objects for too long can cause discomfort, and
prolonged standing or walking triggers sharp pain in my knees. …
even though my
body has physically healed, i still experience phantom pain sensations in areas
that are no longer injured but still register as painful due to how trauma
imprints on the nervous system. the body remembers suffering, even when the
visible scars fade. …
the physical toll
of this experience extends far beyond the initial injuries. even though time
has passed, my body continues to respond as if the trauma is still happening.
the healing process is ongoing, and the impact is something i manage every
single day. the trauma i endured didn’t just affect me emotionally it left
lasting physical scars that i still feel every day.
i can still hear
the gunshot that was fired at the man who tried to help me. the sound is
imprinted in my brain, in my ears at random moments. even in silence, it plays
on repeat in my mind, an endless reminder of that night. my ears still ring
from the impact, a constant reminder that my body remembers even when i try to
forget i can still hear the ringing in my ears from when i was struck in the
face with the bottom of the gun. …
the fear of
unexpected contact is overwhelming. the thought of encountering the wrong
person, or someone who knows about what happened, sends me into a panic. this
weighs on me every day. no matter how much time passes, the fear does not go
away. my sense of security has been permanently altered, and i don’t know if i
will ever feel truly safe again.
letters of support for mr. moore
the following individuals provided letters of
support for mr. moore:
•
oneka moore (sister of mr. moore)
•
paul hagley (friend of mr. moore)
•
vanessa prince (friend of mr. moore)
•
floretta moore (mother of mr. moore)
•
leevaighnia moore (sister of mr. moore)
•
micole moore (sister of mr. moore)
•
keira alexander (daughter of mr. moore)
•
selita moore (sister of mr. moore)
•
laverne lewis (friend of mr. moore)
•
ashley broomes (partner of mr. moore)
throughout these letters, it is clear that mr.
moore has a very loving and supportive family, and there are many people in the
community who care deeply for mr. moore. he is a devoted father, partner, son,
and brother. he gives back to the community when he is able, and at times he
has been diligent in looking for work.
some of the individuals that provided letters
supporting mr. moore were also present throughout the many days of trial and
understand the seriousness of the offences he has been convicted of. in spite
of mr. moore’s criminal antecedents, they continue to hold out hope for his
expected rehabilitation and continue to express to him their support and that
they will be there for him when his sentence is complete.
pre-sentence custody and lockdown records
the calculation of pre-sentence custody for this
matter is no simple task. there are a number of time periods involved, two
separate institutions at which he spent time in pre-sentence custody, release
orders that were cancelled, and new offences incurred while on bail.
while the breach of a release order related to
this offence, and subsequent new charges are not relevant to me on this
sentencing hearing, reference to them is important only for the purpose of
calculating eligible pre-sentence custody.
the following dates are relevant to the
calculation of pre-sentence custody:
1.
mr. moore was arrested on november 2
nd
,
2022, for these offences and released on bail on november 25
th
,
2022. this equals 24 real days.
2.
on march 20
th
, 2024, mr. moore was
arrested for breaching his release order, and on new charges. he has remained
in custody until today (august 22, 2025). this equals 521 real days.
3.
from april 11
th
, 2023, to june 16
th
,
2023, mr. moore was also in custody on charges arising from toronto. he
eventually got bail on those charges. during submissions, counsel for mr. moore
asked that those dates also be included in mr. moore’s pre-sentence custody. i
indicated to counsel that i would not be applying that time in pre-sentence
custody to the charges before me as they are not at all related, and mr. moore
continued to have a valid release order on the charges before me. it would not
be proper to include pre-sentence custody for an unrelated charge into the
calculation of pre-sentence custody on these charges.
applicable to the charges before me, mr. moore
is entitled to credit for 545 real days. pursuant to
r. v. summers
,
2014 scc 26 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no. 26, mr. moore is entitled to enhanced credit on a basis of
1.5 days for every day, resulting in
summers
credit of 818 days or 27.25
months.
many lockdown records, as well as an addendum to
those lockdown records explaining some of the terminologies have been provided.
at times, mr. moore was housed at the toronto south detention centre, and the
central east correctional centre. anecdotally, i will add that both those
institutions are notoriously among the worst correctional facilities in the
province in so far as the treatment of accused persons. frequently, more than
two people are placed in a cell designed for two people. this leads to a
phenomenon referred to as “triple bunking”, although what it really means is
that two people get a proper bed, and a third person sleeps on a mat on the
floor. often right beside the toilet.
lockdowns in these two institutions are almost a
daily occurrence. the reason for the lockdowns is frequently characterized as
“staffing issues.” there are, however, other reasons for lockdowns like medical
emergencies on the range, or contraband found on the range.
when addressing the amount of credit or
mitigation to be given to an offender for harsh pre-sentence incarceration
conditions, i must keep in mind the decisions of the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. marshall
,
2021 onca 344 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 2757 (ca) and
r. v. duncan
,
2016 onca 754 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 5255 (ca).
in explaining the interplay between these two
cases, justice schreck in
r. v. ahmed
,
2021 onsc 8157 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 6979 (scj) stated
the following at paragraph 42:
prior to
marshall
,
courts usually specified a specific amount of time when giving a "
duncan
"
credit. more recently, some courts have read
marshall
to mean that this
practice should be discontinued:
r. v. lee
,
2021 onsc 7672
, at para.
36
;
r. v. suppiah
,
2021 onsc 3871
, at para.
26
. however, in
marshall
,
at para. 53, doherty j.a. explained that quantifying the amount of "
duncan
"
credit is "not necessarily inappropriate" provided that doing so does
not "skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence" and provided that
the "
duncan
" credit is treated as but one of several factors.
unlike with most mitigating factors such as youth or remorse, the mitigating
effect of harsh presentence conditions can be easily quantified as it is
directly related to the amount of time the offender has spent subject to such
conditions. quantifying the amount of "
duncan
" credit promotes
transparency in the sentencing process and also allows the state to know what
effect its failure to maintain appropriate custodial conditions has on a
sentence. however, in light of
marshall
, there is no need for a court to
adopt any specific formula.
many courts before me have commented on the
particularly harsh and unfit conditions at both the toronto south detention
centre and the central east correctional facility. at times inmates are not
permitted showers, use of the telephone, time outside their cell, proper meals,
and proper time visiting with counsel and family members. over and over again
courts provide enhanced credit to offenders for the time spent in pre-sentence
custody, and hopefully one day these correctional facilities will recognize
that this practice will stop when those correctional facilities stop treating
their inmates like animals. when judgments of the superior court of justice
here in ontario have to cite adverse findings from investigations by of the
ontario human rights commission (see:
r. v. shaikh
,
o.j. no. 1434
(scj) at para. 79
) one would think that correctional facilities would get the
message – alas they have not.
pursuant to
r. v. marshall
and
r. v.
duncan
, i am prepared to note an additional 8.75 months credit for the
unduly harsh pre-trial conditions that mr. moore endured while incarcerated at
the toronto south detention centre and the central east correctional facility.
as such, the total pre-sentence custody credit
for mr. moore will be noted as 545 real days, enhanced to reflect credit for 36
months or 1080 days.
positions of the parties
the crown points out that some mandatory minimum
sentences apply. with respect to count #2 (kidnapping with a firearm –
s.279(1.1)(a.1)) there is a mandatory minimum sentence of 4 years. similarly,
with respect to count #4 (sexual assault with a firearm – s.272(2)(a.1)) there
is a mandatory minimum sentence of 4 years. neither count #3 nor count #8 carry
mandatory minimum sentences.
the crown seeks a global sentence of 16 years in custody for mr. moore, less the time that he has spent in
pre-sentence custody. this crown position is based on the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances of the case, mr. moore’s involvement in the offence,
and an overview of applicable caselaw.
the crown submits that an appropriate
apportionment of the sentence could either be by way of a global sentence of 16
years for all charges, or through the imposition of consecutive sentences. if
the latter the crown submits that an appropriate sentence for each of the
sexual assault with a firearm and the kidnapping with a firearm is 10 years or
more, and the other offences are slightly less than that. given that that works
out to decades, the crown submits that the sentence ought to be reduced for
totality to 16 years
.
mr. sobcuff on behalf of mr. moore submits that
taking into account the mitigating factors relating to mr. moore, his loving
and supportive family, his prospect of rehabilitation, his particular role in
the offences, and his personal circumstances an appropriate sentence would be
one of 6.5 years.
counsel breaks this down in terms of a global
concurrent sentence. 6.5 years for the kidnapping with a firearm, 1 year
concurrent on the forcible confinement, 5 years concurrent on the sexual
assault with a firearm, and 5 years concurrent on the reckless discharge of a
firearm. this is also less the time that mr. moore spent in pre-sentence
custody.
in addition to the enhanced credit discussed
above, counsel for mr. moore seeks credit for time that mr. moore spent on
strict bail as per
r. v. downes
,
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 555 (ca). i decline to
give any further enhanced credit for the time that mr. moore spent on bail
prior to his reincarceration. his bail conditions reflected the seriousness of
the offences for which he was charged, and his bail conditions were not so
strict that he was prevented from breaching his bail, and allegedly committing
further offences while on bail.
personal circumstances of mr. moore
mr. moore is 39 years of age; he will be 40 in
november. he has three children, two girls and, and one boy. when not in
custody, he was living with his mother and one of his children (his 15-year-old
daughter) in north york.
mr. moore last worked in 2022 doing deliveries
and occasional factory work. to his credit, and as outlined in the letters of
support, mr. moore has a loving relationship with all of his children and when
he is able, he provides financial support to them.
mr. moore came to canada from grenada in 2006
when he was 20, by himself. he obtained refugee status in 2008 or 2009 as he
was attempting to escape gang violence in grenada. he is now a permanent
resident. in grenada he finished high school and began working construction,
all prior to his arrival in canada.
with respect to his work history in canada, mr.
moore has experienced a wide variety of employment from deliveries to cleaning
companies, he was a forklift driver and was involved in construction and
demolition. he was able to obtain his licence as a forklift driver.
mr. moore has been in a relationship with ashley
broomes for several years, and the strength of their relationship is evident in
ms. broomes’ letter of support. when mr. moore is eventually released form jail
the hope is that he will continue his relationship with ms. broomes and obtain
full time employment hopefully in the construction industry.
as outlined earlier, the letters of support show
a loving and supportive network of family, friends, and community members for
mr. moore. the strength of these relationships, and the support of those close
to him will surely assist in mr. moore’s rehabilitation.
aggravating and mitigating factors on sentence
the offences for which i found mr. moore guilty
are extremely serious, violent, and no doubt traumatic for the complainant. while
i do not propose to go into detail with respect to factual findings that i made
at trial, there are some facts worth repeating. mr. moore, while armed with a
firearm, drove the vehicle with his accomplice “orange hoodie guy” (ohg) (note:
ohg was never located or identified) who was also armed with a firearm. ohg got
out of the vehicle, grabbed a.t. off the street, shot at a good samaritan
trying to assist a.t., and once she was inside mr. moore drove the vehicle
away. knowing what was likely to happen, and being armed himself, mr. moore is
just as responsible for the shooting at the good samaritan as was ohg, the one
who pulled the trigger.
mr. moore then proceeded, sometimes at the
direction of ohg, to drive a.t. around
for hours
in the vehicle, again
all while armed with a firearm. a.t. could clearly see that mr. moore was
armed. at one point mr. moore stopped the vehicle, got into the back seat with
a.t. and forced her – at gunpoint – to perform oral sex on him. a.t. recalled
feeling the firearm pressed on her head while she was performing the sex act on
mr. moore.
mr. moore continued to drive a.t. around in his
vehicle, until it was decided – again with the assistance of ohg – that they
would travel to an address in barrie. again, a.t. was in that car with mr.
moore, both before and after performing oral sex on him at gunpoint,
for
hours
. while in the vehicle, a.t.’s hands and mouth were bound at times
with duct tape.
when at the address in barrie, mr. moore stood
by and at times watched as a.t. was stripped naked, tied to a chair in the
garage, and physically assaulted by a number of other men. her hands and feet
were “smashed” with a hammer, her legs were hit with the same hammer, her hair
was burnt, and at one point a syringe with what is thought to have been heroin
was dragged up and down her arm.
all while this was happening mr. moore either
stood by and watched, left the garage to go smoke, or was indifferent as to
what was happening to a.t. in the garage. at no time in the hours long
interaction with a.t. did mr. moore ever tell her she was free to go, assist in
her escape, attempt to minimize the physical harm that was done to a.t., or
attempt to get a.t. some help.
in addition to the factual findings made at
trial, there are a number of other aggravating factors specifically worth
emphasizing:
•
this was a planned kidnapping. mr. moore had to
have been involved in the planning of this kidnapping. he knew where to go,
where to drive, where to take a.t., and what to do with a.t. when he got there.
while i accept that mr. moore may not have been the “mastermind” behind this
plan, i am certainly prepared to find that he was an integral participant in
the carrying out of this planned kidnapping.
•
throughout his participation in this planned
kidnapping, mr. moore was armed with a firearm. he was armed with a firearm
while both inside his vehicle and outside his vehicle in a public place. the
“taking” of a.t. occurred in a public place, the vehicle was parked at times in
a public place, and a.t. was eventually taken to a residential area in barrie.
all locations which ought to be spared from the presence of a firearm.
•
a.t. was a lone woman, walking in a parking lot
at night, overpowered by physical force and dragged to a vehicle. she was a
particularly vulnerable victim.
•
the firearm that was carried by ohg – which mr.
moore knew about – was discharged at that good samaritan attempting to help
a.t. it was discharged
at
or in the direction of that good samaritan in
a very public and arguably busy parking lot. it is by good luck not good
planning that nobody was injured or killed.
•
that same firearm, and the one carried by mr.
moore was used throughout the night to threaten and intimidate a.t.
•
the circumstances under which mr. moore forced a.t.
to perform oral sex are particularly aggravating. it was accompanied by threats
to shoot her, and the firearm was held to her head.
•
at times both in the vehicle with mr. moore and
in the garage a.t. was bound with duct tape and rope.
•
mr. moore was present for the various assaults
on a.t. while she was bound in the garage. throughout some of these assaults
a.t. was forced to strip naked. numerous injuries were suffered by a.t.
•
a.t. was held captive by mr. moore and his
associates for close to 12 hours before she was able to escape. most of that
time she was in the sole presence of mr. moore.
•
the firearm used by mr. moore and the firearm
used by ohg were never recovered.
the impact of these offences on a.t. has been
profound, all of which is outlined in discussion of her victim impact statement
above.
by way of mitigation, mr. moore has spent a
significant amount of time in pre-sentence custody. mr. moore is a relatively
young man, 39, and comes before the court with a relatively unrelated criminal
record.
mr. sobcuff submits that given the family and
community support for mr. moore, his prospects of rehabilitation are high, and
given that this will be his first significant jail sentence, the principles of
specific and general deterrence and denunciation are met with a jail sentence
of any length.
mr. sobcuff urges that the sentence ought not be
one of such a length that it would be crushing for mr. moore and asks me to
consider restraint when considering the overall length of the sentence.
further, by way of mitigation, mr. sobcuff
reiterates that mr. moore was not the mastermind behind this kidnapping. he
suggests that mr. moore was not involved in any of the planning that went into
these offences. while i am prepared to find that mr. moore may not have been
the mastermind, he certainly was an active participant in these offences.
analysis
general principles
imposing a fit sentence is often the most
difficult task faced by a trial judge. this is a highly individualized process,
and one that rarely comes down to a mathematical calculation. the sentence must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and to the degree of
responsibility of the offender. the court must weigh both the aggravating and
mitigating factors present in every case, before determining what it feels to
be a fit sentence.
a sentencing judge must always remember that the
fundamental purpose of sentencing, as outlined in
section 718
of the
criminal
code
, is to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect
for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society by
imposing just sanctions.
section 718
of the
criminal code
sets out
the objectives a sentencing judge is to consider:
a. to denounce
unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is
caused by unlawful conduct;
b. to deter the
offender and other persons from committing offences;
c. to separate
offenders from society, where necessary;
d. to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
e.t o provide
reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and
f. to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to
victims or to the community.
other sentencing principles, applicable to the
case before me, are outlined in
section 718.2
of the
criminal code
:
a court that imposes a sentence shall also take into
consideration the following principles:
(a) a sentence should be increased or reduced to
account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing,
…
(iii.1) evidence that the offence had a significant
impact on the victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances,
including their health and financial situation,
…
shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances;
(b) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if
less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e) all available sanctions, other than imprisonment,
that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to
victims or to the community should be considered for all offenders, with
particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
in
r. v. senior
,
o.j. no. 321
(scj)
christie j. made the following comments beginning at paragraph 26:
pursuant to
section 718.1, a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender. proportionality is a cardinal
principle of sentencing, therefore, whatever weight a judge gives to the
objectives listed above, the ultimate sentence imposed must respect the
fundamental principle of proportionality.
see
r. v. nasogaluak
,
2010 scc
6
, paras.
41-43
;
r. v. safarzadeh-markhali
,
2016 scc 14
;
r. v.
lacasse
,
2015 scc 64 (canlii)
,
3 s.c.r. 1089
;
r. v. omoragbon
,
2020 onca 336
, para.
28
in
r. v.
parranto
,
2021 scc 46
, the supreme court of canada recently stated:
this court has repeatedly expressed that
sentencing is "one of the most delicate stages of the criminal justice
process in canada" (
r. v. lacasse
,
2015 scc 64
,
3 s.c.r.
1089
, at para.
1
). more of an art than a science, sentencing requires judges to
consider and balance a multiplicity of factors. while the sentencing process is
governed by the clearly defined objectives and principles in part xxiii of the
criminal
code
, it remains a discretionary exercise for sentencing courts in
balancing all relevant factors to meet the basic objectives of sentencing (
lacasse
,
at para.
1
).
the goal in every case is a fair, fit and
principled sanction. proportionality is the organizing principle in reaching
this goal. unlike other principles of sentencing set out in the
criminal code
,
proportionality stands alone following the heading "fundamental
principle" (s. 718.1). accordingly, "[a]ll sentencing starts with the
principle that sentences must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender" (
r. v. friesen
,
2020 scc 9
, at para.
30
). the principles of parity and individualization, while
important, are secondary principles.
...
as to the relationship of individualization to
proportionality and parity,
this court in
lacasse
aptly observed:
proportionality is determined both on an individual
basis, that is, in relation to the accused him or herself and to the offence
committed by the accused, and by comparison with sentences imposed for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances. [para. 53]
individualization is central to the proportionality
assessment. whereas the gravity of a particular offence may be relatively
constant, each offence is "committed in unique circumstances by an
offender with a unique profile" (para. 58). this is why proportionality
sometimes demands a sentence that has never been imposed in the past for a
similar offence. the question is always whether the sentence reflects the gravity
of the offence, the offender's degree of responsibility and the unique
circumstances of each case (para. 58).
while
previous sentencing decisions are helpful to consider, each sentencing a court
is tasked with must be conducted by considering the specific offence and
specific offender in that particular case. only in this manner will
proportionality be respected. every case is unique in some way.
with respect to the applicability of “ranges of
sentence,” the comments of chief justice wagner and justice rowe in
r. v.
friesen
,
2020 scc 9 (canlii)
, s.c.j. no. 100 are always important to bear in mind:
courts can
and sometimes need to depart from prior precedents and sentencing ranges in
order to impose a proportionate sentence. sentencing ranges are not
"straitjackets" but are instead "historical portraits" (
lacasse
,
at para.
57
). accordingly, as this court recognized
in
lacasse
, sentences can
and should depart from prior sentencing ranges when parliament raises the
maximum sentence for an offence and when society's understanding of the
severity of the harm arising from that offence increases (paras. 62-64 and 74).
even though
firesen
dealt with sexual
offences against children, the comments relating to the use of “ranges” are
applicable across the board:
we thus wish
to express our concern about sentencing ranges based on precedents that appear
to restrict sentencing judges' discretion, for example, by imposing a cap of
three to five years on sentences that can only be exceeded in exceptional
circumstances. for instance, the british columbia court of appeal has set a
range for sexual interference of one to three years and has suggested that only
in "rare circumstances" would a sentence above three years be
justified (
r. v. williams
,
2019 bcca 295
, at para.
71
(canlii)
).
similarly, the newfoundland court of appeal has held that the range for sexual
assault of a child involving both "intercourse" and abuse of a
position of trust is three to five years and that "special
circumstances" are required to depart from this range (
r. v. vokey
,
2000 nfca 14
,
186 nfld. & p.e.i.r. 1
, at para.
19
).
it is
inappropriate to artificially constrain sentencing judges' ability to impose a
proportionate sentence in this manner. as this court's decision in
l.m
.
makes clear, sentencing judges must have the ability to impose substantial
sentences for sexual offences against children when the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender so demand (para. 30). there is
no requirement for there to be rare or special circumstances in order to impose
a substantial sentence where that substantial sentence is proportionate.
range of sentence
the crown provided several cases useful in
understanding the appropriate range of sentence for these types of offences.
in
r. v. bellissimo
,
2009 onca 49 (canlii)
, o.j. no. 179
(ca) the ontario court of appeal found that the proper range of sentence for
“serious gun-related offences” is between seven and eleven years. this was an
attempt murder, involving an accused person who fired shots into a busy
restaurant narrowly missing a number of people, and significant injuring one.
in
r. v. dhaliwal
,
o.j. no. 2514
(ca)
the ontario court of appeal reduced a seven-year sentence to six years for
an offender who fired a single gunshot into the ceiling of the hallway in a
mixed-use building. this is the type of offence that appears to be at the lower
end of the
bellissimo
range.
the crown argues in the case before me that if
the discharge of a firearm into the hallway ceiling of a mixed-use building is worth
six years, then the discharge of a firearm at a good samaritan in a busy
parking lot must be worth more.
justice schreck in
r. v. jama
,
2021 onsc 4871 (canlii)
,
o.j. no. 3784 made the following comments:
crimes
involving handguns are far too common in the greater toronto area. handguns
have but one purpose: to kill or seriously injure human beings. because of the
prevalence of these types of offences, courts have repeatedly emphasized the
need for sentences designed to meet the objectives of general deterrence and
denunciation. i am well aware that there are questions about the efficacy of
general deterrence. however, that does not change the fact that there is clear
appellate direction requiring sentencing courts to impose "exemplary"
sentences:
r. v. nur
,
2015 scc 15 (canlii)
,
205 scc 15
,
1 s.c.r. 773
, at para.
82
;
r.
v. dufour
,
2015 onca 426
,
326 c.c.c. (3d) 52
, at para.
8
;
r. v. brown
,
2010 onca 745
,
277 o.a.c. 233
, at para.
13
:
delchev
, at para. 20.
had the defendants
simply possessed a loaded handgun, they would have been liable to a sentence in
the range of three to four years. had they used the handgun to threaten another
person, the sentence would have been higher. had they discharged the handgun
once in the heat of argument, it would have been even higher. but they did more
than that. they discharged it at least three times. this was not a momentary
lapse in judgment. it was a planned and deliberate act.
the crown
relies on
r. v. bellissimo
,
2009 onca 49
, at para.
3
, where the court
referred to a range of seven to 11 years for "serious gun-related
offences."
bellissimo
is a short endorsement and it is unclear what
offence the accused had been convicted of, although it is clear that he fired
several shots inside a restaurant and injured two people, one significantly.
the range in that decision has been applied in discharge firearm
cases:
r.
v. campbell
,
2021 onsc 4193
, at paras.
10-14
;
r. v. charley
,
2019
onsc 45
, at para.
45
. however, it is most often applied in cases involving
injuries or attempts to cause injuries, such as cases of aggravated assault or
attempted murder:
r. v. johnston
,
2021 onca 331
, at para.
19
, aff'g
2020
oncj 272
, at paras.116-117;
r. v. hanan
,
2020 onsc 1209
, at para.
141
;
r.
v. abdirahim
,
2019 onsc 2617
, at para.
31
;
r. v. weeden
,
2019 onsc
773
, at para.
41
;
r. v. reis
,
2017 onsc 1961
, at para.
29
;
r. v. ali,
2016 onsc 8190
, at para.
4
;
r. v. nadon
,
2016 onsc 3518
, at para.
33
;
r.
v. murphy
,
2016 oncj 67
, at para.
15
; r. v. persaud,
2014 oncj 322
, at
para.
16
;
r. v. jefferson
,
2014 onca 434
, at para.
14
. in my view, the
bellissimo
range may be properly applied only to cases of intentional shootings where
someone is injured or there was an attempt to injure someone:
r. v. dhaliwal
,
2019 onca 398
;
r. v. haque
,
2019 oncj 466
, at para.
45
;
r. v. larmond
,
2011 onsc 7170
, at para.
26
.
it follows
from the foregoing review that the appropriate sentencing range for discharging
a restricted or prohibited firearm without causing or attempting to cause an
injury to another person is higher than the three-to-four year range for
possession of such a firearm and lower than the seven-to-11 year range
in
bellissimo
.
given the dangerousness inherent in discharging a firearm where others are present,
in my view the appropriate range is closer to the
bellissimo
range than
it is to the possession range. i therefore conclude that the appropriate range
for s.244.2 offences using a restricted or prohibited weapon is five to seven
years. i draw this conclusion without considering the mandatory minimum
penalty.
the crown argues that on the facts before me,
there is ample evidence that ohg attempted to injure the good samaritan, in
that he fired directly (or almost directly) at him from a very short distance
away. i agree with that assessment. the firearm was not discharged in the air,
it was not discharged into the ground, it was discharged at the good samaritan.
all, in my opinion, with the full actual or likely knowledge of mr. moore that
this could happen.
justice fuerst in
r. v. abderezak
,
o.j. no. 5297 (scj)
notes:
sentencing
ranges are primarily guidelines, and not hard and fast rules:
lacasse
,
at para.
60
. while i acknowledge the range identified by schreck j. as
generally applicable for the offence of reckless discharge, seven years is not
an absolute ceiling. sufficiently aggravating factors may move the top end of
the range higher.
the
objectives of denunciation, general deterrence, and protection of the public
are paramount in sentencing for firearms offences, particularly those involving
the unlawful possession of loaded handguns in public places:
see,
r. v.
morris
,
2021 onca 680
, at para.
71
;
r. v. marshall
,
2015 onca 692
,
at para.
49
.
the crown position with respect to the range for
the offence of reckless discharge of a firearm is that if i accept that there
was an attempt to injure the good samaritan, then the range is seven to eleven
years. if i do not accept that then the range is five to seven years, but it is
not capped at seven years. ms. batorska argues that the significant aggravating
factors take this at the very least to the level of eight years.
r. v. l. d.
,
o.j. no. 4695 (ca)
is a case of a carjacking of a husband and wife
turned kidnapping. after being kidnapped the two were assaulted, robbed, and
held for eleven and a half hours. they were held initially in their car and
then taken to an apartment. the accused in this case were career criminals, and
the facts were described by the trial judge as “one of those few examples of a
crime that goes beyond pure horror.”
the ontario court of appeal reduced the sentence
to one in a range of 14 to 16 years.
l.d.
had aspects of kidnapping, but
without the discharge and without the sexual assault like exists in the case
before me.
in
r. v. levy
,
o.j. no. 1091
(scj)
, on a case with far more serious facts than the case before me, justice
forestell makes the following comments with respect to the offence of
kidnapping:
in sentencing
for kidnapping, denunciation, deterrence, and the protection of the public must
be the primary objectives.
as the
british columbia court of appeal explained in
r. v. poon
:
...kidnapping strikes at the heart of the community's
sense of safety and security. it is an offence that is intended to incite fear
and terror in not only the person kidnapped, but also his or her family and
friends, many times using that fear to extort money in return for that person's
safe return. even when the victim is released without having sustained any
permanent physical injuries, the psychological and emotional scars may be slow
to heal, if they ever do.
there is a
wide range of sentence for kidnapping, ranging from 6 years to life
imprisonment. sentences in the 6 to 10-year range are considered to be at the
low end of the range and are reserved for cases that do not have aggravating
features like gratuitous violence and for offenders who played a lesser role.
sentences in the mid-range of 10 to 14 years have been imposed for serious
kidnapping cases involving ransom. even youthful first offenders have received
sentences in this range. a minimal role in the offence and mitigating personal
circumstances may, exceptionally, bring the sentence below the 6 to 10-year
range.
generally,
the cases in which sentences at the higher end of the range have been imposed -
16 years to life imprisonment - have involved offenders who participated in the
planning of the kidnapping and who have criminal records and circumstances that
include assaulting and threatening the victims.
in
r. v.
brar
, the british columbia court of appeal identified criteria that are
indicative of the gravity of the offence of kidnapping. these are:
(a) the purpose of the kidnapping, specifically
whether it is carried out for ransom or as a means of extorting a payment or
repayment from the victim;
(b) the extent to which there is planning and
premeditation;
(c) the length and conditions of the confinement;
(d) the extent to which there is violence, torture, or
significant physical injuries;
(e) whether third parties are threatened;
(f) whether guns are used;
(g) whether there is gang involvement;
(h) whether the kidnapping occurs in the course of the
commission of another offence; and
(i) the circumstances in which the kidnapping ends.
the crown argues that applying the facts before
me to the list outlined by justice forestell above, mr. moore is at the higher
end of the range identified. the offence here, and the level of violence
inflicted on a.t. borders on torture.
when sentence ranges are as high as those often
referred to in the case of kidnapping, sentencing judges also need to look at
whether to impose a global sentence for kidnapping, and then include other
offences concurrently within that range, or to impose consecutive sentences.
the manitoba court of appeal in
r. v. cook
,
m.j. no. 77 (ca)
provides some discussion:
the rationale
of the judge to focus on the kidnapping offence as the "overarching
charge" (at para. 8) was correct given the nature of the crime of
kidnapping.
kidnapping is
a continuing offence. it is an aggravated form of unlawful confinement. the
kidnapping began when the victim was forcibly taken on main street. it
continued throughout the major sexual assault and accompanying choking. the
kidnapping did not end until the victim's unlawful confinement was over, when
she escaped on her third try (
r. v. vu
,
2012 scc 40
at para.
25
,
2 s.c.r. 411
).
…
once the
judge determined it was proper to impose sentences for the two other offences
concurrent to the kidnapping sentence, he was entitled to impose a higher
sentence for the kidnapping offence to reflect the fact that a number of
separate serious offences were committed together (
r. v. maroti
(m.),
2010 mbca 54
at para.
28
,
255 man.r. (2d) 115
;
r. v. duerksen
(j.a.),
2012 mbca 41
at para.
5
,
280 man.r. (2d) 84
;
r. v. taylor
(m.a.),
2010
mbca 103
at paras.
12-13
,
262 man.r. (2d) 43
; and
r. v. g.w.r
.,
2011
mbca 62
,
268 man.r. (2d) 204
). in
wozny,
macinnes j.a. explained (at
para. 70):
as i have already stated, it is a legitimate
sentencing requirement when imposing a concurrent sentence to impose a more
severe penalty given multiple offences and their number than one might give for
the same offence individually or as compared with a couple or a few offences.
in summary,
the judge was correct to see the sentence for kidnapping being longer than for
the offences committed during the kidnapping. the
vu
decision
makes it
clear that the kidnapping began with the victim's forcible taking, it continued
during her captivity while other serious crimes occurred, and it only ended
upon her successful escape. the assessment of proportionality for the purposes
of s. 718.1 of the
code
, therefore, had to take into account two
features of this case. the maximum punishment for the principal offence at the
core of the inter-related criminal event was life imprisonment. as well, any
sentence imposed for kidnapping should be more significant due to the fact that
the offences of sexual assault and overcoming resistance to commit an offence
by choking
occurred during the kidnapping and
concurrent sentences for those offences were imposed.
in the offence before me, it is clear that the
kidnapping is the overarching offence. the reckless discharge of a firearm, the
sexual assault with a firearm, and the continued forcible confinement of a.t.
all occurred throughout the kidnapping with a firearm. under the horrific
umbrella of the continuing offence of kidnapping with a firearm, a.t. was held
captive for almost 12 hours, sexually assaulted at gunpoint, and the good
samaritan trying to save her was shot at.
justice nishikawa’s decision in
r. v. burke
,
o.j. no. 2592 (scj)
was submitted by the crown, in so far as it provides
a helpful summary of the range of cases for the offence of sexual assault with
a firearm. in
burke
, the court found the range to be close to that of
kidnapping.
counsel for mr. moore submits that almost all
these cases can be distinguished on their facts. he is correct. the benefit
however to a review of the caselaw is that it provides a sentencing judge with
potential range with which to slot the facts of any particular case into.
while these ranges are very helpful, they are
not, as pointed out above, a straitjacket to confine judicial decision making.
in order to get to the higher end of the ranges, and sometimes even just to fit
into the range the facts need to reflect the seriousness of those offences
which attract significant custodial sentences.
considering the facts before me, the
participation of mr. moore in the offences committed, and the impact of the
offences on the physical and emotional health and well being of the
complainant, mr. moore must be at the higher end of the sentencing range for
kidnapping as outlined in
l.d
. and
levy
. i find that the range of
sentence for kidnapping with a firearm for someone with mr. moore’s
participation, with the added significantly aggravating offences of sexual
assault with a firearm and reckless discharge of a firearm is 12 to 16 years
the horrific, degrading, violent and disgusting
acts that mr. moore and his associates put a.t. through warrant a significant
custodial sentence. whether mr. moore was the “man behind the curtain” pulling
all the strings or not, he was a willing and active participant in some
terrifying criminal activity.
imagine being a.t., imagine being grabbed,
shoved into a car with gunfire ringing alongside your confinement, held in that
car by armed men for hours, only to have one of them force you to give him oral
sex while tapping you on the head with a gun. then imagine being stripped naked
and tied to a chair in the garage while other men burn you with a lighter,
assault you with a hammer, a screwdriver, and a needle full of heroin. all the
while, imagine that the man who brought you to that garage is standing by
smoking and watching.
if only that scenario were the unimaginable.
unfortunately, that is exactly what happened to a.t., and mr. moore had a hand
in all of it. offences like this cry out for a sentence that reflects the
principles of specific and general deterrence, but most of all denunciation for
the disgusting display of criminality that it is.
conclusion
taking into account mr. moore’s role in the
offences, the aggravating and mitigating circumstances outlined above, the
appropriate ranges of sentence as discussed in the caselaw, the impact of the
offence on the victim, the principles of sentencing as outlined in the
criminal
code
, and the personal circumstances of mr. moore, the sentence imposed is
as follows:
•
count number 2, kidnapping with a firearm – 13
years in jail, less three years spent in pre-sentence custody, for a total of 10
years remaining.
•
count number 3, forcible confinement – 3 years
concurrent to count number 2.
•
count number 4, sexual assault with a firearm –
6 years concurrent to count number 2.
•
count number 8, reckless discharge of a firearm
– 7 years concurrent to count number 2
in addition, there will be a dna order pursuant
to
section 487.04
of the
criminal code
on the primary designated offence
of kidnapping (count #2). there will be a
soira
order imposed on count
#4 for 20 years pursuant to
section 490.013(2)
(b) of the
criminal code
.
a
section 109
weapons prohibition for life will be imposed on count #8, and an
order pursuant to
section 743.21
of the
criminal code
will issue
prohibiting mr. moore from communicating directly or indirectly while in
custody with a.t., michael rocco, or the young person s.m.
released:  august 22, 2025
signed:
justice m. townsend