ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. bassey,
2025 oncj 501
date:
2025 09 29
court file#: toronto, 23 10000533-00; 24 48114070-01
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
yassin bassey
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on june 6, july 24, and september 23, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 29, 2025
a. rudra................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
g. grill and a. kleiman...................................................................... counsel
for y. bassey
jones j.:
introduction
yassin bassey pleaded guilty to one count of
possession of a loaded, restricted firearm (
criminal code
section
95(1)); one count of careless use of a firearm (
criminal code
section
86(1)); and one count of possession of a schedule i substance (cocaine) for the
purpose of trafficking (
cdsa
section 5(2)). the crown proceeded by
indictment.
following the conclusion of the sentencing
hearing, i reserved my decision. these are my reasons.
facts in support of the guilty pleas
on september 18, 2022, at approximately 4 a.m.,
mr. bassey, ms. h. habib, and ms. r. watson were occupants in a parked motor
vehicle near queen st. west and spadina avenue in downtown toronto. mr. bassey
was seated in the rear of the motor vehicle. ms. watson was in the front
passenger seat, and ms. habib was in the driver’s seat.
mr. bassey had a loaded handgun. while he was
handling the firearm, he unintentionally discharged it. the bullet went through
his upper thigh and then into ms. watson’s back, through the front passenger
seat. ms. habib called 911 to assist her friends.
ms. watson was treated for her injuries at a
nearby hospital. she was released a few days later.
mr. bassey was located by police officers at
scarborough general hospital as they received a report of a gunshot injury. he
was not initially forthcoming about what happened. he was not arrested at that
time.
on april 30, 2024, mr. bassey was located at #2208
– 252 victoria street, toronto. this is the residence of ms. k. hirsi. video
footage obtained by the investigating officers demonstrated him exiting and
entering this condominium unit over a period of two weeks.
officers attended and located mr. bassey and ms.
hirsi inside a bedroom. the officers conducted a search of the apartment and seized
a loaded handgun and one kilogram of cocaine. the officers also seized $2115 in
canadian currency.
mr. bassey did not accept responsibility for the
handgun but did for the cocaine when he entered his guilty pleas.
background of the offender and social context
evidence
mr. bassey is 33 years old and was born in
toronto. he has two older brothers. his mother, ms. s. mahdi, emigrated to
canada from somalia with her two older sons before mr. bassey was born. his
father arrived in canada a few years later.
often, ms. mahdi was the only provider for her
children. she moved the family to windsor when mr. bassey started grade 1. he
recalled realizing he was financially worse off than most of his childhood
friends. he was also one of the few black children in his class, which led to
him being bullied. both he and his brothers faced many acts of racism.
one day, when mr. bassey was still a child, he
was at home and heard a knock at the door. he opened it, and five men rushed
into the house. one punched him in the jaw. they ransacked the townhouse and
stole various items. that event was traumatizing for the whole family. ms.
mahdi decided they would move to guelph.
there, the racism mr. bassey experienced grew
worse. he was the only black child in his new class. again, he experienced
cruelty from other children due to his race.
ms. mahdi ultimately sent mr. bassey’s brothers
to a boarding school. when mr. bassey was twelve, he and his mother moved to
toronto. they lived by themselves.
he attended school and was talented at
basketball. he tried out for the grassroots toronto 50, a program started by
the toronto police service. he made the team but soon learned that he could not
afford the costs of a uniform and travelling to other cities for away games. as
a result, he was unable to participate, which was very hard on him emotionally.
as he began high school, mr. bassey became more
aware of his social status and the disadvantages he faced compared to his peers.
he admitted to committing theft-related offences during this period, as he felt
it was unfair that he could not enjoy what many of his peers had.
he was also frequently subjected to the practice
of “carding,” which was a common police procedure at the time. he felt humiliated
each time he was stopped and searched. at 15, he was falsely accused of a
serious criminal offence because contraband was found on one of his friends. he
was arrested, charged, and brought to youth court. the charges were eventually
dropped. however, he never felt the same afterwards. he was kicked off his high
school basketball team due to the charges, which led him to lose hope that his
life would improve.
shortly afterward, his brothers returned to the
household. his oldest brother became involved in criminal activity. then, tragically,
a close friend of his was stabbed to death. mr. bassey was overwhelmed, failed
his classes, and then dropped out of school.
at 17, he met ms. i. djaffar, with whom he fell
in love. at 19, he moved to alberta to find work and start anew. he worked in
the alberta oil fields as a general labourer. for a time, he was successful.
on one occasion, he visited his aunt and uncle
in saskatoon. as he got off the greyhound bus, police officers grabbed him and
asked questions for no apparent reason. they accused him of lying about his
identity, and he was arrested for obstructing justice. he pleaded guilty just
to avoid jail.
seeking more emotional support in his life, he
asked ms. djaffar to move to alberta. she agreed, and they married on september
20, 2014. a year later, their first son was born. this changed mr. bassey’s
life. a year after that, his second son was born. being a husband and father
brought him great happiness. he worked at various jobs to support his family.
in 2019, his family visited toronto. he was in a
car with his cousin when police officers pulled him out violently and forced
him to the ground. he was later charged with attempted murder. it was
eventually revealed that the officers mistook the car he was in for another one
linked to a shooting. his charges were dropped within six months of his arrest.
he described this experience as “traumatizing.”
he returned to edmonton. his third son was born
in 2021. driven by a desire to prevent his sons from facing the financial
hardships he experienced as a child, he chose to engage in criminal activity
for profit. he accepts that this was a mistake. as he stated in his affidavit,
“i failed my wife and i failed my children.”
mr. bassey spoke to me in court on the final day
of the sentencing hearing. he apologized for his crimes and convinced me he had
insight into why what he did was wrong. he wants to focus on being strong for
his children and to be present in their lives. his experience in jail has
changed him. i found him to be sincere and heartfelt.
mr. grill submitted 11 letters of support for
mr. bassey from his family, friends, and community members. each author
acknowledged mr. bassey’s crimes and did not try to excuse them. instead, they focused
on describing the man they know in their lives, offering a different
perspective on mr. bassey as a person.
his mother described him as a “loving, loyal
family man” who has always displayed “kindness, compassion,” and “generosity.”
he is a proud father to his three boys, and the time he has spent in jail has
been very hard on his children. her son has been praying regularly since his
arrest and has spoken to her about his desire to become a better person. in her
view, he has great potential.
other letters mention how mr. bassey has
consistently been a positive influence in the lives of the authors. for
example, his niece, ms. ebyan bassey, wrote that he always showed her
unconditional love and support. a close friend, mr. manal osman, described mr.
bassey as a “tremendous friend and supporter” who has stepped in during
critical moments in someone’s life to offer help when needed.
nearly all the authors noted that mr. bassey has
a strong affection for his children and is actively engaged in their lives.
ms. djaffar wrote a notably heartfelt letter of
support. she has known him for 15 years and describes him as a “kind, loving
and devoted” man. he has consistently supported his children and maintained a
steady presence in their lives. his dedication to their well-being has never
wavered. she believes he sincerely regrets his criminal actions and the time
lost with his children due to being incarcerated. recently, she has noticed
changes in him: he has become “more reflective, more intentional and committed
to his personal growth.” she believes he has made these changes both for
himself and their children. she is confident he will continue to make every
effort to be a committed father once he has served his sentence.
a letter from a representative of midaynta
community services, ms. amina noor, dated july 22, 2025, confirmed that mr.
bassey is eligible to participate in project turn around. that is a program
designed to support his rehabilitation and successful reintegration into the
community upon his release from custody. midaynta community services is a
non-profit, community-based organization dedicated to empowering marginalized
populations. their mandate is to deliver culturally responsive and
trauma-informed programs and services that promote social inclusion, mental and
physical well-being, and economic empowerment. mr. bassey will receive tailored
support from a team of workers, including in-house clinicians trained in
culturally sensitive care.
the plan developed for mr. bassey includes
one-on-one counselling, mental health support, and guidance to help him build
essential life skills for successful community reintegration. staff from
midaynta will also assist him in connecting with stable housing programs, if
needed, as well as employment services. these services are designed to support
mr. bassey during the critical transition he will face as he returns to the
community after custody.
prior criminal record
mr. bassey has a prior criminal record. on november
14, 2011, he pleaded guilty to the offence of obstructing a peace officer. the
cpic document filed by the crown only states he received “time served.”
on february 4, 2019, he was found guilty of
resisting arrest and failing to comply with a recognizance. he received a $200
and $500 fine, respectively.
experience in pre-sentence custody
since his arrest on april 30, 2024, mr. bassey
has accumulated 519 days of pre-sentence custody (“psc”) at the toronto south
detention centre (“tsdc”). mr. grill filed an affidavit sworn by his client
about his experiences at the tsdc on july 24, 2025, and a supplementary
affidavit on september 23, 2025. mr. rudra did not challenge the contents of
these affidavits.
mr. bassey spent over half of his time in
custody in full or partial lockdown. on a full lockdown day, inmates are not allowed
to use the shower. they may also have to forfeit their ability to make a 15-minute
phone call. mr. bassey has regularly gone up to 72 hours without a shower,
access to the telephone, or even hot water.
partial lockdown days are not much better. the
unit where he was placed at the tsdc has 20 cells, each designed to hold two
inmates. two officers are assigned to this unit and can unlock no more than 40
inmates at a time. when the unit exceeds capacity, units are only unlocked
through a “tier program,” which involves officers taking turns releasing
specific tiers of cells. his unit typically houses 49 to 52 inmates, which
necessitates the implementation of the “tier program.” normally, he is allowed
to leave his cell for up to four hours per day. some days, he is only released
for two or three hours.
overcrowding remains a constant concern. he has
been triple-bunked in his cell since january 20, 2025. he must sleep on a thin
mattress on the floor near a shared toilet.
the lack of basic amenities can sometimes worsen
unexpectedly. on august 26, 2025, a search and laundry sweep was conducted of
his cell. correctional officers took everything that the cellmates were not
wearing on their bodies, including their extra clothing, blankets, sheets, and
towels. during search days, the guards are supposed to replace what was taken
during the same day by returning clean sheets, a blanket, and a towel. this did
not happen. mr. bassey did not receive the returned linens and clothing until
september 10, 2025, which was 16 days after the items were taken. he had to
wear the same clothes and sleep on a bare mattress. he did not have a towel to
even take a “birdbath” during this period.
mr. bassey is rarely able to exercise. he “has
not seen the sky since his arrest.”  he has become depressed. he feels he is no
longer the same person. he is attempting to stay strong for his family, but mr.
bassey has lost contact with them. he is only allowed one face-to-face visit
per month with anyone other than his lawyer. since his incarceration, he has only
been able to see his youngest child, who is four years old, twice. he has not
seen his other two sons at all. while he prefers to keep them from knowing the
full truth about where their father is held, the lack of contact has taken a
toll on him emotionally. even scheduled visits with his wife or youngest child
can provide false hope, as family visits are often cancelled at the last minute
and are difficult to reschedule. some months, he has had no family visits whatsoever.
at the start of this year, his ability to even
read books was restricted. the rules in the jail changed. previously, inmates
could receive books from amazon ordered by friends or family. now, this
practice has been banned. books are only available at the jail library, which
he can access once a month. during a library visit, over 40 inmates have to
share about 50 books among themselves. inmates have no control over which books
are offered to them. reading has been “one of the only escapes” he can turn to
when locked in his cell.
in mr. bassey’s assessment, the conditions at
the tsdc are “inhumane.” even when he is allowed out of his cell, it is
difficult for him to gain access to a telephone. when he does, he must decide whether
to call his children, his mother, or his lawyer. there are many days when he is
unable to speak to anyone at all, as there are only four phones on his unit,
and access is far from guaranteed. there is an “informal” way inmates decide if
you are permitted to use the phone on any given day.
yet it is the potential for violence that makes
time at the tsdc the most dangerous and difficult to endure. on february 12,
2025, a new inmate arrived in mr. bassey’s unit. that inmate punched mr. bassey
and used an object to slash mr. bassey from his upper left collarbone down to
his right upper chest, leaving a five-inch-long scar. the inmate also slashed
mr. bassey’s left upper forearm and the back of his right hand, leaving
additional scars. this was a terrifying experience. he is now understandably
anxious when he is released from his cell.
tempers frequently flare among inmates because
they are confined in their cells for long hours each day. violent incidents,
such as the one involving mr. bassey, are not rare. fights can erupt over
something as simple as access to the shower. for example, on march 26, 2025,
mr. bassey learned of another inmate whose face was slashed over tensions
related to shower use.
positions of the parties
mr. rudra submits that a global ten-year
sentence would normally be required for mr. bassey’s offence. however, given
the mitigating factors present, he submits that an eight-year prison sentence
is appropriate. he does not dispute that this sentence should be reduced by an
appropriate credit for mr. bassey’s time spent in pre-sentence custody.
he cited several authorities that state a
sentence range of three to five years exists for an offender convicted of
possessing a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm. sentences at the higher
end of this range are common when there is evidence that the firearm was
involved in the illicit drug trade: see, for example,
r. v. george
,
2024
onsc 6016
, at para.
74
. in his written materials, mr. rudra correctly pointed
out that all crimes involving firearms pose a “real and substantial danger to
the public’s safety” and have been described as a persistent “blight on the
city and its residents”: see
r. v. vijaykumaran
,
2025 onsc 886
, at
paras.
38-9
. there was no innocent purpose for mr. bassey possessing the
firearm in this case and his actions should be deemed to fall near the “true
crime” end of the spectrum for a section 95 offence.
while mr. bassey did not intentionally discharge
his firearm, he caused that to happen through his own carelessness. he caused
serious injury to himself and ms. watson. a sentence as high as seven years
could be appropriate for this offence alone: see
r v. jama and farah,
2021
onsc 4871
,
at paras.
42-45
.
regarding the drug trafficking offence, mr.
rudra submits that case law establishes that a “mid-level” trafficker will
generally receive a sentence of five to eight years, even if he is a first-time
offender:
r. v. bryan,
2011 onca 273
, at para.
1
. cocaine is an
inherently dangerous drug that can have a significant impact on its users.
mr. rudra agrees that the conditions at the tsdc
may be considered as a mitigating factor. but a detention centre is not meant to
be pleasant every day either, and i should not let any reduction in sentence i consider
beyond
summers
credit distort what must remain an otherwise
proportionate sentence.
mr. grill submits that the drug trafficking
offence should result in a three-year sentence, and the
section 95(1)
offence
for possession of a loaded firearm should result in a 2.5-year sentence. a
further one-year sentence for the offence of careless use of the firearm should
be imposed, given the injuries that occurred. that would produce a total
sentence of 7.5 years, but mr. grill requests that it be reduced to five years,
considering the principles of totality and restraint. mr. bassey is effectively
a first-time offender, and any period of incarceration should be as short as
possible accordingly.
the parties agree that mr. bassey has served 519
real days of pre-sentence custody and is entitled to
summers
credit of
779 days. mr. grill asks me to award his client considerable credit for the
harsh conditions he has experienced at the tsdc: see
r. v. raymond,
2024
onsc 2786
, at paras.
57-61
. he submits a credit of one day for each day his
client has served at the tsdc (in addition to
summers
credit) would be entirely
justified. if i were to agree, the net sentence mr. bassey would be required to
serve from today’s date would be approximately 18 months' custody, followed by
an appropriate term of probation.
mr. grill asks me to consider that the firearms
offences, while serious, are not entirely at the “true crime” end of the
spectrum as suggested by mr. rudra. the possession offence by itself may
justify a sentence in the reformatory range: see
r. v. gordon-brown,
2024
onsc 1300
, at para.
43
. there is no evidence linking the earlier firearms
offences to the later drug offence, and there is no evidence of any additional
criminal activity at the time mr. bassey was in possession of the firearm. moreover,
this was not a case of intentionally discharging a firearm. it was an accident.
that demonstrates a very different degree of moral culpability for mr. bassey.
regarding the drug offences, mr. grill does not
dispute that the quantum of cocaine is aggravating. however, he submits that
the absence of evidence of mr. bassey’s role in the drug trade should also be considered,
and i should not draw an inference that he occupied a highly significant role that
the evidence does not support. that would be speculation.
mr. grill reviewed the most emotionally powerful
elements of his client’s affidavit during his submissions, which detailed his
difficult life experiences. his client, like many disadvantaged people, has
gone through life “with one hand tied behind his back”: see
r. v. j.g.,
2021
onsc 1095
,
at para.
27
.
the systemic racism he has experienced
has limited his opportunities, and that should be considered when i determine
his degree of moral culpability, even for offences of this nature.
despite all his personal challenges, mr. bassey
has achieved a great deal in his life. the most important of these
accomplishments is that he was a loving husband and remains a loving father to his
three children. mr. bassey’s affidavit and the letters of support filed on his
behalf make it clear that his separation from his family (including his
ex-wife, with whom he co-parents) is taking a toll on all of them. mr. grill
reminded me that the absence of mr. bassey’s father from his life when he was a
child had an impact on him, too. i should consider how to diminish this very
serious collateral consequence when sentencing mr. bassey so that his children
do not suffer similarly.
mr. grill also asks me to condemn the conditions
mr. bassey has faced while in pre-sentence custody. they are so appalling that
they may well demonstrate a violation of his client’s
charter
rights on
a near-daily basis. years of court decisions in ontario have condemned these
conditions, yet the situation appears to remain unchanged. he urges me to use
my decision to serve a communicative purpose and to state that the government’s
ongoing refusal to address these conditions must be met with a strong judicial
response.
aggravating and mitigating factors
the following aggravating factors
are present in this case:
•
mr. bassey possessed
a loaded, prohibited firearm in a motor vehicle parked in a busy section of
downtown toronto;
•
he
discharged the firearm, causing significant injuries to himself and ms. watson;
•
his
decision to possess the firearm was intentional;
•
he had no
lawful basis for possessing this weapon;
•
he has a
prior criminal record (although entirely unrelated to the index offences);
•
he
possessed a significant quantity of cocaine for drug trafficking; and
•
he
possessed $2115 in proceeds of crime.
there are also several mitigating factors:
•
mr. bassey pleaded guilty, sparing the court the
need for a potentially lengthy trial;
•
he has expressed remorse for his crimes;
•
he has strong family support;
•
his time spent in pre-sentence detention has
been harrowing; and
•
social context evidence presented to the court
demonstrates the impact of systemic discrimination on him as a child and young
adult, which somewhat diminishes his moral culpability for these offences, as i
will explain.
firearms and drug-trafficking offences
general deterrence and denunciation are typically
the primary sentencing principles applied to firearms-based offences. the unlawful
possession of a loaded, restricted or prohibited firearm in downtown toronto often
results in a penitentiary sentence of at least two to three years, even for an
offender without a prior criminal record: see
, for example,
r. v. mansingh
,
2017 onca 68
at paras.
21-24
.
that range is not set in stone, however,
and the existence of mitigating factors may justify a departure from it.
nevertheless, i agree with mr. rudra that mr. bassey’s
firearms-related offences were quite severe. in
r. v. hills
,
2023 scc 2
,
the supreme court of canada stated that the seriousness of an offence “should
be measured by taking into account the consequences of the offender’s actions
on victims and public safety, and the physical and psychological harms that
flowed from the offence”: see para. 58. when a firearm is discharged and
someone is injured, significant prison sentences should be expected. if a firearm
was discharged intentionally, the ontario court of appeal has established a
general range of 7 to 11 years in custody as an appropriate sentence: see
r.
v. bellissimo
,
2009 onca 49
.
furthermore, section 718.2(a)(iii.1) of the
criminal
code
states that “evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the
victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances, including their
health and financial situation, … shall be deemed to be aggravating
circumstances”. the injuries mr. bassey caused to ms. watson, even if she
recovered from them, were unquestionably significant.
while the firearm was
confined to a motor vehicle when it was discharged, the vehicle was parked near
a busy intersection in downtown toronto. an innocent member of the public could
have been walking nearby at that moment. previous court decisions have
highlighted the increasing danger of gun violence in toronto, especially in
public places where people would reasonably expect to feel safe: see
, for
example,
r. v. bezabeh
,
2025 onsc 422
, at para.
40
. it is
also well established that carelessly storing a loaded firearm in a motor
vehicle increases the seriousness of mr. bassey’s offences:
r. v. bashir
,
2012 onca 793
, at para.
9
. firearms in vehicles are often linked to ongoing or
planned future criminal activities.
moreover, this case underscores the paramount
importance of handling firearms with care and responsibility. they have the
potential to inflict life-changing injuries or even cause death. fortunately,
both mr. bassey and ms. watson recovered from this incident. others might not
have been so lucky. had the firearm been discharged at a slightly different
angle, the bullet could have potentially struck an innocent person in the
nearby area. all of this was entirely foreseeable to mr. bassey. his actions were
not only reckless but also demonstrated a startling lack of appreciation for
the extreme danger he posed to himself, his friends, and those near the vehicle
when he mishandled the firearm.
but there is something very qualitatively
different about an offender who accidentally discharges a firearm as compared
to an offender who does so intentionally: see
jama
at para. 44. i agree
with mr. grill that mr. bassey’s moral culpability is lessened accordingly, and
reported decisions focused on offenders who intentionally discharged a firearm are
of limited assistance.
approximately 18 months after committing the firearms offences, mr.
bassey engaged in a different form of serious criminal activity when he was
caught in possession of a kilogram of cocaine. general deterrence and
denunciation should also be given strong consideration as sentencing principles
for an offender found guilty of possessing a significant quantity of cocaine
for trafficking. in
r. v. lynch
,
2022 onca 109
, the ontario court of
appeal held that the range of sentences for mid-level cocaine traffickers can
be as high as five to eight years: see para. 14. the perils of hard drugs such
as cocaine are well-documented in our jurisprudence.
social context evidence
sentencing is a highly individualized process
that must consider more than just the objective gravity of the offences
themselves. proportionality, the fundamental principle of sentencing, requires
the sentencing court to also consider the degree of responsibility of the
offender:
criminal code
section 718.1. to fully assess the degree of
responsibility of the offender, a sentencing court must consider any evidence
presented that speaks to his “status and life experiences”:
r. v. parranto
,
2021 scc 46
at para.
44
. one’s background and personal circumstances are always
relevant to their “individual moral responsibility”:
r. v. i.m.,
2025
scc 23
, at para.
164
.
social context evidence is a form of evidence
that may inform this analysis. in
i.m.
,
the supreme court of canada held
that social context evidence can be considered when assessing an offender’s
moral culpability, especially for “offenders who belong to racialized groups
who face overt and systemic discrimination.”
in
r. v. morris
,
2021
onca 680
, the ontario court of appeal explained that social context evidence
can shed light on how “an offender's choices were limited or influenced by his
disadvantaged circumstances”, which in turn “speaks to the offender's moral
responsibility for his acts: see para. 76.
mr. bassey is a black canadian, and through his
affidavit, he described his experiences with systemic racism. the supreme court
of canada in
r. v. spence
,
2005 scc 71
, accepted that “racial prejudice
against visible minorities is… notorious and indisputable”, and a “social fact
not capable of reasonable dispute”: see para. 5. evidence of the impact of
anti-black racism on an offender may be relevant to the paramount objective of
the court in determining a fit and appropriate sentence:
morris
at para.
56
.
mr. rudra does not dispute that mr. bassey’s
moral culpability must be assessed in the context of his life experiences and
the discrimination he has faced. however, he argued that mr. bassey “made his
bed, and now he must lie in it.” i understood this submission to mean that mr.
bassey made a conscious decision to engage in criminal activity, regardless of
his prior life experiences, and there are consequences that must inevitably
follow.
while there is no need for an accused to draw a
direct causal link between his life experiences and the offences, there must be
some connection between the fact of systemic racism and “the circumstances or
events that are said to explain or mitigate the criminal conduct in issue”:
morris
at para.
97
;
r. v. s.m
.,
2023 onca 417
, at para.
27
. as noted by the
supreme court of canada in
i.m
, the social context in which someone
grows up “can often affect the trajectory of their life. understanding that
trajectory helps place the [offender’s] decisions in context”: see para. 166.
mr. rudra’s position, in my view, thus mischaracterizes the relevance of this
evidence. systemic racism will rarely be said to have compelled someone to
“choose” crime. instead, it operates in a less visible but equally damaging way
by reducing the quality of pro-social opportunities available to those who
experience its effects. this, in turn, increases their exposure to harmful
conditions or environments, which raises their chances of engaging in criminal
activity. one’s moral culpability may therefore be diminished because the
alternative, pro-social lifestyle choices that would normally be accessible to
them are significantly limited by the material impact of anti-black racism on
them, their families, and their larger communities.
that being said, the relevance of social context
evidence must be carefully assessed on a case-by-case basis. mr. bassey was
approximately 30 years old at the time of the shooting and 32 when he was
arrested while in possession of a considerable quantity of cocaine. he was not
a youthful first-time offender. as a mature man in his 30s, his moral
culpability for these offences must be assessed accordingly. without
diminishing, for a moment, what the social context evidence presented during
this hearing has revealed about mr. bassey’s difficult upbringing and the injustices
he and his family faced, i find that this evidence has limited weight when
applied to these particular offences. mr. bassey chose to arm himself with a
loaded firearm, while unprepared to handle it, leading to serious injuries to
himself and ms. watson. nearly a year and a half later, he subsequently chose
to engage in the illegal drug trade. when he made these choices, he knew right
from wrong.
importantly, as explained by justice loparco in
r.
v. mugodo
,
2025 abkb 500
, “the notion that society’s complicity in
anti-black racism somehow diminishes the need to deter and denounce serious
criminal conduct” must be rejected. rather, sentencing judges must “acknowledge
both the existence of systemic racism and that the sentencing process may
perpetuate societal complicity in anti-black racism”, and incorporate that
important factor into their decisions: see para. 34;
morris
at para.
86
.
as i will explain, i have attempted to do that with how i have structured the
sentence i impose today for mr. bassey.
difficult conditions of pre-sentence custody
in
r. v. crawford
,
2025 oncj 385
, justice
fraser wrote the following at paras. 78-9:
the degree of
civilization in a society can be judged by entering its prisons.
what happens
inside our prisons matters. the conditions inside our penal institutions
reflect upon our society at large. they demonstrate, for better or worse, our
collective commitment to the most fundamental of human rights. our prisons are
a statement, rendered in concrete and steel, of the dignity we afford to every
person, no matter how marginalized, misguided, or lost.
as a judge sitting at 10
armoury street in toronto, i regularly hear evidence of the terrible conditions
facing inmates at the tsdc. it is challenging to accurately portray the daily
realities for inmates at this institution in written form to those unfamiliar
with the criminal justice system. the most accurate description to date comes
from justice molloy’s powerful and moving account in
r. v. shaikh and tanoli
,
2024 onsc 774
. justice molloy made the
following observations about the toronto south detention centre at paras.
73-79
, which i wish to highlight:
the biggest
problem at the toronto south is that there have been frequent lockdowns, both
partial and full. during those lockdowns, inmates have restricted access to
everything: rehabilitation programs; religious observance; fresh air; showers;
cleaning products; laundry; visits and telephone calls with loved ones; and
meetings and telephone calls with their lawyers. inmates are locked up in small
spaces for hours, sometimes days on end. prison is already an anxiety producing
environment. the lockdowns have the impact of exacerbating these problems and
tensions frequently spill over into actual conflicts. i have been hearing these
stories, and many varieties of them, for years. conditions got worse during covid
(which is not wholly unexpected), but they have not improved much since. the
most disturbing feature is that the reason for the lockdowns, almost
exclusively, is staff shortages. based on what i have been seeing in numerous
cases over that year or two, the lockdowns at the toronto south are typically
between 50 to 60% of the total days in custody. this is shameful.
…
the toronto
south cells are solid concrete. there are no windows. there is no yard. there
is merely a small area off the cell block which is bounded by concrete, and
uncovered at the very top, so there is some air that can come in that way.
during lockdowns, even that “privilege” is lost.
medical care
for inmates housed in these institutions is also inadequate, particularly
during periods of lockdown.
these
conditions are not humane. if the canadian public heard
that one of our citizens was being held in similar conditions in a foreign
prison, especially while presumed innocent of any
charges against them, they would be outraged, as they
should be. and yet, these dehumanizing conditions have continued unchecked and unimproved.
…
in 2020 the
ontario human rights commission conducted an investigation into the conditions
at the toronto south and issued a report as to its findings.  i will not
comment here on the commission’s findings with respect to human rights concerns
and the use of segregation and restrictive confinement. however, the commission
commented on many problems that judges of this court are now finding to be
routine, including: prisoners not being able to make contact with friends and
family; public health concerns related to infrequent changes of bedding and
clothing and outbreaks of skin conditions such as scabies; and stressful
conditions caused by frequent lockdowns. the commission noted that the toronto
south was not operating at full capacity at that time due to staff shortages
and that the frequent lockdowns were also attributable to staff shortages,
including staff making extensive use of “sick days” due to occupational stress-related
injuries and long-term leaves due to disability. i am not aware of any
follow-up taken by the ministry of the solicitor general in response to this
report. however, i can certainly attest that my experience and that of many of
my colleagues is that the conditions at the toronto south have not improved.
the well-documented list of
court decisions condemning conditions at the tsdc includes various published
rulings from this court and the superior court of justice. however, even by the
terrible standards inmates regularly face at this institution, mr. bassey’s
experience in pre-trial detention is particularly troubling. the evidence
presented during this sentencing hearing demonstrates that despite years of
court rulings bringing the deplorable state of affairs at the tsdc to the
attention of the provincial government, the conditions have worsened, not
improved.
in
r. v. crawford,
2025 onsc 345
,
justice mirza emphasized that courts must never
allow the deplorable conditions in provincial remand facilities to become
“normalized” and accepted as an unfortunate but unavoidable reality for those
in custody: see para.
182
. justice
mirza noted that despite ongoing developments in jurisprudence from both trial
courts and the court of appeal, no improvements have been made by those
responsible for the state of our jails. as stated in para.
184
of
crawford
(s.c.j.):
it is
important to acknowledge that the reported decisions are a fraction of the
total annual sentencing decisions which are mostly unreported at all levels of
trial courts, that are required to factor unacceptable pre-trial custody
conditions. our system has come to expect that unusually harsh conditions are
part of sentencing but these cruel circumstances must not continue. they are
contrary to the public interest for multiple reasons by fostering violence,
restricting access to support, and complicating sentencing hearings.
it should be unimaginable that a wealthy,
progressive society would allow its citizens to be treated this way. if we
expect offenders to show a commitment to their rehabilitation and ultimately lead
a pro-social life, we must provide them with an environment where achieving
those goals is not only realistically possible but actively encouraged.
instead, we have done the opposite, allowing our provincial jails to fall into
such disrepair that every day an inmate spends there almost certainly makes it
more difficult for them to reform themselves. when inmates are forced to spend
most of their waking hours locked in a small, overcrowded cell, filled with
anxiety about whether they will be continuously deprived of their most basic
human needs or subject to acts of violence, we should not be surprised by the adverse
outcomes that inevitably follow.
the conditions at the tsdc that
ms. bassey has experienced are so appalling that it is hard to find words to
adequately condemn them. mr. bassey has not seen the sky since his arrest,
except when travelling to and from court. his cell lacks a window. inmates are
not given any chance for outdoor exercise. he cannot have meaningful, regular
contact with his family, including his children, through visits. he goes days
without basic human necessities. he must sleep on a thin mattress on the floor
in his cell, next to a shared toilet, due to overcrowding. he has been
subjected to physical violence, through no fault of his own, leaving him
physically and emotionally scarred. his mental health continues to worsen. if
he is lucky, he may have one face-to-face visit with his family each month. due
to a new policy introduced this year, his ability to even read books has been
greatly restricted.
those responsible for this
tragic and inexcusable situation should have taken meaningful steps to address
it long ago. as justice fraser noted, these conditions are “unworthy of us as a
society and diminish all the people of this province”: see
crawford
(o.c.j.)
at para.
100
. i note that
during the sentencing hearing in
crawford
(o.c.j.), justice fraser asked
the crown to provide evidence of how the state has responded to these concerns.
it chose not to do so: see para.
97
.
a sentencing court may consider particularly
punitive conditions during an offender’s pre-sentence custody, and a reduction
in the overall sentence may be appropriate accordingly:
r. v. brown
,
2025
onca 164
, at para.
4
.
in
r. v.
jogiyat
,
2024 onsc 3498
, and
r. v. k.p.,
2025 onsc 3286
,
justices
schreck and mandhane held that “significant credit” must be awarded to an
offender “in the face of the government’s continued indifference to the
situation risks bringing the administration of justice into disrepute”: see
jogiyat
at para.
107
;
k.p.
at para.
47
.
treating
inmates in this manner may also raise constitutional issues. in
r. v.
sanchez-neria
,
2025 oncj
209
, justice lai observed that the offender before
her had “experienced atrocious pre-trial conditions” at maplehurst correctional
centre. she also referenced an earlier, unreported decision of her own,
r.
v. dooley
, released on march 6, 2025 (brampton 23-1871 (ont. c.j.)), in
which she commented on the potential
charter
implications of the ongoing
mistreatment of detainees in provincial jails: see para.
48
in
sanchez-neria
. in
dooley
, justice lai stated
the following:
defence
counsel raised a sophisticated philosophical argument characterizing those
conditions as, in effect, a suspension of the rule of law. he is not wrong. the
state is demanding legal compliance from mr. dooley while flouting the basic
guidelines for the humane treatment of prisoners. this hypocrisy imperils
public confidence and challenges the state’s moral authority to inflict
deprivations of liberty as a legal consequence. what mr. dooley has suffered is
a disgrace to the administration of justice. the jurisprudence is clear that
this factor cannot justify the imposition of a sentence that is
disproportionate. i do, however, give this factor significant weight in
deciding the appropriate sentence.
i find this analysis compelling and persuasive,
and note that in
k.p
., justice mandhane of the superior court of justice
reached the same conclusion as justice lai at para. 48.
when an offender has been
forced to endure particularly appalling mistreatment while in pre-sentence
custody,
charter
remedies are available. see, for example,
r. v.
boles,
2025 abca 236
, where an offender received inadequate medical care in
custody, resulting in a violation of her section 12
charter
right
against cruel and unusual punishment. her sentence was reduced by one year.
if the provincial government continues to do
nothing despite repeated judicial decisions condemning the inhumane conditions in
our jails, and these conditions worsen rather than improve, courts must
consider alternative remedies to what have become standard sentence reduction
calculations. justice fraser stated that it was “abundantly clear by now that
the state has failed, through mismanagement or simple lack of funding, to
fulfill its fundamental obligations to prisoners who are detained in the remand
facilities of ontario”: see
crawford
(o.c.j.) at para. 97; see also the
report of ontario ombudsman paul dubé, june 25, 2025, available online.
i leave the question of an alternative remedy
for another day, as i was not asked to formally consider it in this case.
importantly,
the court of appeal has cautioned sentencing courts that any reduction in
sentence based on harsh pre-sentence conditions cannot skew the court’s overall
analysis and justify imposing an unfit sentence:
r. v. westcott
,
2025
onca 291
, at para.
13
. however, i note that with every
passing year, the provincial government has had yet more time to address this
ongoing human rights crisis. its refusal to act is revealing.
over time, the courts in this province may need to
seriously reconsider their existing approach to a state of affairs that simply cannot
be condoned.
likely experience in federal custody for black
canadians
when determining the appropriate period of any
further incarceration, i must consider how that sentence will likely impact mr.
bassey while he is serving it. both parties in this case agree that a
penitentiary sentence is necessary. in
hills
, the supreme court of
canada recognized that black canadians are overrepresented in the criminal
justice and correctional systems. at para. 105, the court observed that “black
offenders are often released later in their sentences and experience lower
parole grant rates (department of justice, spotlight on gladue: challenges,
experiences, and possibilities in canada’s criminal justice system (2017), at
p. 7; office of the correctional investigator, a case study of diversity in
corrections: the black inmate experience in federal penitentiaries (2013), at
para. 84).”
mr. grill filed with the court a copy of the
“office of correctional investigator annual report 2016-2017”, authored by ivan
zinger. his office’s conclusion as of june 2017 was that black canadians in
federal custody continue to experience poorer outcomes on many important
correctional indicators. these include that black inmates are more likely to be
classified as maximum security, are over-represented in admissions to
segregation, and are disproportionately associated with incidents involving of
use of force: see pp. 59-60.
mr. grill also filed the “office of correctional investigator annual
report 2021-2022.” in this report, also authored by mr. zinger nearly five
years later, he concluded that black canadians continued to be over-represented
in federal custody. their placements were unsurprisingly similarly distorted.
black canadians were overrepresented within maximum security in the federal
correctional system
and
underrepresented in minimum security. black
inmates were more likely to be the subject of the use of force while in
custody, regardless of their risk level, age, sentence length or gender: see
pp. 39-76. see also
r. v. rurimirije
,
2024 onsc 4984
, at para. 45
.
in
crawford
(s.c.j.), justice mirza
explained how this stark reality should be factored into sentencing decisions
at para. 189:
all of this
information must be situated in the broader reality that black people are
already treated more harshly in jail regarding racist mistreatment, higher
security designations, lack of cultural programming and disparate treatment for
parole eligibility. these long-standing systemic discrimination problems are
further impetus for sentencing courts to be vigilant to ensure that long jail
sentences be as exacting as possible. to the extent possible, denunciation,
deterrence, and restraint must be carefully calibrated so as not to contribute
to these systemic problems by imposing a sentence longer than necessary.
family separation concerns
in
r. v. habib
,
2024 onca 830
, the
ontario court of appeal noted that the impact of a lengthy custodial sentence
on an offender’s family must be considered. sentencing judges must “preserve
the family as much as possible," and when incarceration is necessary, they
must give “serious and sufficient consideration to family separation
consequences”: see para. 44. although these considerations should not overpower
other principles of sentencing, depending on the evidence before the court,
family separation consequences “may justify a sentencing adjustment – even a
significant one – or a departure from the range” that would otherwise be
appropriate: see para. 45.
this principle applies even for “grave offences
that require deterrence and denunciation”: see para. 45. in
r. v. d.l.,
2025
onca 533
, the accused was convicted of 17 charges of intimate partner violence
that involved the use of weapons, choking, and bodily harm to his victim. the
sentencing court imposed a conditional sentence. a factor that weighed heavily
in that decision was that the accused had children and, if incarcerated, he would
not be able to provide them with financial or other forms of support. the ontario
court of appeal dismissed a crown appeal against sentence, noting that the
“trial judge’s concerns about the impact of incarceration on this offender were
justified, as were his concerns about its impact on d.l.’s family (including
his ability to pay child support)”: see para. 47.
the letters of support for mr. bassey, including
that of his ex-wife, ms. djaffar, demonstrate that he is a loving father who
has had a profoundly positive influence on his children’s lives. every day that
he remains in custody deprives them of his love and support. evidence that
demonstrates an offender, while out of custody, cares for and provides for
family members has been recognized by the ontario court of appeal as a factor
indicating good character and proof of positive rehabilitative prospects: see
r.
v. ali
,
2022 onca 736
, at paras.
41-42
.
depriving children of regular contact with their
parents can severely affect their long-term development. the negative effects
of family separation are well-known. they include children facing higher risks
of anxiety, depression, and other mental health issues. they are also more
likely to experience diminished self-esteem and poorer academic outcomes over
time.
children whose fathers are imprisoned may endure what has been described as a “potent
life-course disruption” that increases the chances of them developing
behavioural problems of their own. that, in turn, often results in these
children interacting with the criminal justice system themselves in the future.
these damaging outcomes are more commonly associated
with historically disadvantaged communities due to the pervasive effects of
systemic racism.
the government of canada has recognized that black canadians are
overrepresented in canada’s criminal justice system generally and the federal
offender population in particular.
at the provincial level, it is worth noting that black canadians have traditionally
been subjected to disproportionately high levels of investigation by child
welfare services and black children are significantly overrepresented in ontario’s
child welfare system.
i recognize that mr. bassey’s children are cared for by their mother, and i did
not hear that his continued incarceration would place them at risk for being
apprehended by a children’s aid society. nevertheless, his absence from their
lives is felt by them every day, and his continued incarceration is indirectly
harming them. their well-being and long-term potential must not be forgotten
during the sentencing process.
collateral consequences of this nature are tragically
inevitable when sentencing an offender for serious offences. consideration of them,
while important, cannot overwhelm the sentencing court’s ultimate decision, and
there is no requirement that collateral consequences reduce a sentence: see
r.
v.
aiken
,
2024 onca 326
, at para.
13
. but they can and must be
factored into the court’s analysis, especially for canadians for whom the
adverse effects of child separation have historically been more acutely felt. returning
mr. bassey to his children’s lives as quickly and realistically as possible
will mitigate these negative outcomes for his dependent children, which is not
only in their best interest but also in the best interest of society at large. reunification
will also provide mr. bassey with the greatest possible source of strength and
motivation to guide him into a productive, pro-social life in the future: his
demonstrated commitment to being a loving and involved father.
conclusion
mr. bassey’s crimes were grave and cry out for a
meaningful sentence. those who become involved with the illegal drug trade and/or
carry dangerous firearms with them for their selfish purposes will be met with
an appropriate response from the court. however, i note that in this case, the firearms-based
offences and the drug trafficking offence were committed on entirely different
occasions, over a year and a half apart. no evidence was presented connecting
mr. bassey’s possession of a firearm on september 18, 2022, to the drug trade,
and the crown did not require that he accept responsibility for the firearms
located when the search warrant was executed on april 30, 2024, as part of the
global plea deal presented to the court. the linkage between the firearms and
drug-based offences is therefore not established on the evidence, as it is in
many of the reported decisions relied upon by the crown. there is therefore an
absence of that otherwise potentially significant aggravating factor.
nevertheless, i
acknowledge primacy must be placed on the sentencing principles of general
deterrence and denunciation for firearms-based offences and drug-trafficking,
no matter how impressive the offender’s rehabilitative prospects: see
, for
example,
boles
at para.
34
;
r. v. marshall
,
2015 onca 692
, at para.
49
.  at the
same time, even in cases where the primary sentencing principles are deterrence
and denunciation, "to ensure respect for human dignity, the door to
rehabilitation must remain open":
r. v. bertrand marchand
,
2023
scc 26
, at para.
123
.
i conclude that mr. bassey has extremely
promising rehabilitative prospects. his family and friends are a source of
strength and support that will inspire him to maintain a crime-free lifestyle.
he has a comprehensive plan to reintegrate
himself into society with the assistance of midaynta community services. he is
an excellent father and family member, supported by those who love and care for
him.
as noted by the supreme court of canada in
hills
,
the assessment of a proportionate sentence is “not merely some abstract
mathematical calculation but involves precious time that an offender” will have
to spend in prison: see para. 134. in my view, an appropriate global sentence
in this case is a five-year prison sentence, as submitted by mr. grill. that
appropriately respects the totality principle and the principle of restraint.
i apportion three years to the firearms offences:
two years for the section 95 offence and one year consecutive for the section
86 offence. i impose two years, consecutive, for the drug-trafficking offence. while
the quantum of cocaine was considerable, i may still place considerable
emphasis on the principles of restraint and rehabilitation for someone who has
no prior drug convictions: see, for example,
r. v. gordon,
2025 onsc
2597
, at paras.
72-80
.
applying
summers'
credit, i reduce mr.
bassey’s sentence by 779 days, or the equivalent
of approximately 2
years and 2 months. considering the difficult conditions mr. bassey has faced
in pre-sentence custody, which i consider to be a very significant mitigating
factor in this case, i adjust the further period of incarceration required to
give effect to the global sentence and impose a two-year sentence today, to be
followed by three years of probation. both mr. bassey’s long-term
rehabilitation and the protection of the public will be better served by his
receiving ongoing supervision after his release from custody while he
reintegrates into society. this sentence will furthermore enable him to
reconnect with his family within a reasonable period, thus restoring his
pro-social relationships and facilitating his access to vital community
supports.
the informations will be endorsed as follows with respect to the
jail sentences:
•
cdsa 5(2) offence: 2 years in jail;
•
section 95(1) offence: 519 days of psc (credited
for 779 days) and 1 year jail, concurrent;
•
section 86(1) offence: 1 year in jail,
concurrent.
while he is on probation, he will take appropriate counselling or
programming as directed by his probation officer, make reasonable efforts to
secure employment, obey a curfew, and complete 240 hours of community service
over the first 18 months of the order. these conditions will assist him with
his reintegration into the workforce and require him to contribute back to
society for what he has done: see
criminal code
section 732.1(3)(f)).
there will be a forfeiture and destruction order with respect to the
seized firearm and ammunition pursuant to
criminal code
section 491(1).
i order forfeiture of the seized funds as proceeds of crime pursuant to
criminal
code
section 462.38.
i issue a
criminal code
section 109 order for life on all
offences.
these are secondary designated offences, and i find it is in the
best interests of the administration of justice to impose a dna order:
criminal
code
section 487.051(3)(b)
.
the victim fine surcharges are waived. mr. bassey will remain in
custody and it would cause him undue hardship to pay the fines.
released:   september 29, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
mr. rudra did not dispute that there were significant triable issues in this
case, including a potentially lengthy challenge to a search warrant that was
executed on mr. bassey’s cell phone, and a
charter
section 11(b) application.
in
k.p.
,
justice mandhane explained how the conditions in ontario’s jail
likely violate the
united nations minimum rules for the treatment of
prisoners (
the “mandela rules”): see paras. 42-47.
indeed, it is not difficult to imagine a much greater sentence
reduction being appropriate where an inmate was denied crucial medical care. i
do not interpret the alberta court of appeal’s decision as stating that the one
year reduction against sentence granted by the sentencing court was necessarily
the only justifiable remedy, simply that it would not interfere with the
sentencing court’s decision based on the appropriate standard of review.
https://www.ombudsman.on.ca/en/news/media-releases/ombudsman-calls-urgent-reform-ontarios-correctional-system-and-stronger-respect-rights
mr. grill did not file a
charter
application seeking any form of relief,
and the crown would be entitled to an opportunity to respond to any application
that sought an alternative remedy.
dr. b. pickering, “psychological consequences for children of incarcerated
parents” (international centre for criminal law reform and criminal justice
policy, august 2023); j. bouza et al, “the science is clear: separating
families has long-term damaging psychological and health consequences for
children, families and communities” (society for research in child development,
june 20, 2018)
baker, g. shattered dreams: paternal incarceration, youth expectations, and the
intergenerational transmission of disadvantage. (sociological science 10:
559-584, september 19, 2023).
this phenomenon is well researched in the context of mass incarceration in the
united states. see, for example, wildeman, c. parental imprisonment, the prison
boom, and the concentration of childhood disadvantage.
demography
46,
265–280 (2009).
overrepresentation of black people in the canadian criminal justice system
,
government of canada, department of justice, december 15, 2022. available
online:
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/jr/obpccjs-spnsjpc/index.html
nicole bonni and keishia facey,
understanding the over-representation of
black children in ontario child welfare services
(2018). available online
via the ontario association of children’s aid societies website:
https://www.oacas.org/2022/06/new-report-reveals-the-reality-of-anti-black-racism-in-ontario-child-welfare-service-delivery/