ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. barber,
2025 oncj 526
date:  2025 10 07
court file no.:  23-11401103
between:
her
majesty the queen
—
and —
christopher barber and tamara lich
before
justice heather e. perkins-mcvey
heard on various dates september 2023 to october
2025
reasons for judgment released on october 7, 2025
s. wetscher & t. radcliffe............................................ counsel
for the crown
d. magas .................................................. .….…
for the accused chris barber
l. greenspon, e.
granger & h. drennan ………. for the
accused
tamara lich
perkins-mcvey,
j.:
i.
overview
tamara
lich and christopher barber were each convicted of mischief and mr. barber was
additionally convicted of counselling others to disobey a court order arising
from their involvement in the freedom convoy, which gridlocked the streets of
ottawa from january 29 to february 18, 2022. both accused were released on bail
under strict conditions, with ms. lich spending forty-nine days in custody and
mr. barber two days.
the
trial spanned just over two years with numerous days during that time,
involving extensive evidentiary hearings, and unprecedented procedural motions,
a bail variation, an application to stay, each requiring fulsome submissions on
each of these legal arguments. although this sentence decision will draw an end
to these proceedings for ms. lich, the crown application seeking the forfeiture
of “big red” has not concluded and will continue later in november.
the
crown seeks extraordinary, in fact unprecedented custodial sentences for each
of the accused. the crown seeks a custodial sentence of seven years for ms.
lich and eight years for mr. barber given his additional conviction for
counselling to disobey a court order. the crown argues that there is no real
precedent in terms of sentencing for a mischief of this nature, scope and
magnitude.
the
crown argues that mr. barber and ms. lich are criminally responsible for the
extraordinary harm caused, and profound impact to the public and the community
of ottawa because of the freedom convoy 2022 of which they were leaders and
organizers. it is further argued that the mischief arising from the freedom
convoy had a significant broader public impact. the crown argues the messaging
of the accused did not represent passive expressions of belief, but rather
active, sustained counselling of unlawful conduct.
defence
counsel for both accused, on the other hand, submit that the offences warrant
absolute discharges or, alternatively in the case of mr. barber at least, a
non-custodial disposition. counsel for mr. barber submit the sentence sought by
the crown is excessive, unfit, and unduly harsh, amounting to cruel and unusual
punishment.
counsel
for ms. lich says the crown’s sentencing position is untenable and ask the
crown to admit that this is a prosecution not because of the means advocated by
tamara lich but because of the means used by a minority of protestors present,
suggesting the real raison d ‘être of this prosecution has always been the consequences
of those means employed by others. he also argues that there are five
unprecedented things about this case that reduce ms. lich’s moral
blameworthiness. one, the means used by others should not be visited upon her
in terms of sentence. arguing, ms. lich never advocated for the means that were
actually used, the ones complained of, the ones that led to the consequences.
two, she never advocated violence or unlawfulness. three, it is suggested that there
were other groups and persons she did not control, that did not act peacefully.
fourth are the considerable efforts made by ms. lich and mr. barber to mitigate
the consequence of the means utilized by others. and that there is no case
where a protestor attempted to work with police to lessen the impact of the
protest. and lastly, counsel for ms. lich argued that the freedom convoy had a
positive effect on the lives of thousands of people across this country.
the
parties could not be further apart in their submissions or in their
perspectives regarding this case much in the same way as this trial has
highlighted the schisms in canadian political society. politics has no place
inside the courtroom and plays no role in the determination of what is a fair,
just and appropriate sentence.
in
determining a fit and proportionate sentence, the court must consider the
gravity of the offence, the degree of responsibility of each offender, and the
applicable sentencing principles under the
criminal code
. the court must
also consider relevant jurisprudence to situate the present case within the
broader framework of protest-related mischief sentencing.
ii. summary of trial
findings of fact relevant to sentence
the court’s
complete finding of fact is set out in the trial decision
r. v. barber and
lich
o.j. no.1564 (c.j)
released april 3, 2025, and those reasons
have been fully considered. of course, they inform the aggravating and
mitigating factors to be considered as part of the sentencing process. in
summary they are as follows:
both accused were found
guilty of mischief for their roles in organizing and sustaining a protest that
interfered with the lawful use and enjoyment of property. the mischief caused
by the actions of the accused as principals and parties of the mischief was
neither peaceful nor lawful. the protest was nonviolent but not peaceful. the
court found the freedom convoy went beyond the boundaries of a legal protest.
they were found to
have counselled mischief through their public statements and social media
posts.
mr. barber was also found guilty of
counselling others to breach a court order prohibiting horn use.
the freedom convoy protest took place
in ottawa from january 28 to february 21, 2022. the protest caused significant
disruption to the downtown core, including blocked streets, obstruction of
emergency lanes, constant honking of horns, odorous diesel fumes, and
restricted access to residences, businesses, and services. civilian witnesses
testified to being unable to sleep, work, or access medical appointments.
businesses reported loss of revenue and customer access.
ottawa police initially facilitated
truck parking and provided maps for staging areas. inspector lucas approved the
operational plan set out in exhibit no. 125 to contain the protest. it was his
decision to allow trucks on wellington street. he said wellington was where
they wanted to be, and it was an easy place to manage. the ottawa police looked
for areas where they could divert these vehicles to mitigate the impact on the
city. he said; “it’s a balance regardless of the message. we wanted to balance
the right of free speech but mitigate the impact.”
however, the trucks coming to ottawa
did not follow those instructions and restrictions as set out in the
operational plan found in trial exhibit no. 125. police attempted to maintain
emergency lanes but lost control early in the protest. later, a plan to reduce
the footprint was developed. this plan, however, was only partially implemented
before being halted by police leadership. police liaison teams (“plt”)
communicated regularly with mr. barber to manage safety and logistics.
tamara lich was a founding member and
president of the freedom convoy 2022 corporation. chris barber was one of the
founding directors. ms. lich arrived with chris barber january 28, 2022. both
she and chris barber were involved in organizing and leading trucks from
western canada.
chris barber drove a truck (“big
red”) from stewart valley joining the convoy along with others in medicine hat,
alberta which was parked on wellington street for approximately eleven days
january 29, 2022, to february 8, 2022.
there was overwhelming
evidence that ms. lich and mr. barber were leaders of a significant group of
truckers that arrived in ottawa, and that group was described as the broad
moderate group.
the
freedom convoy associated with this group that consisted of approximately three
hundred trucks.
both ms. lich and mr.
barber came to ottawa with the noblest of intentions, to simply protest their
wish for the government and the then prime minister to end covid mandates.
chris barber made social media posts
acknowledging the disruption caused by the protest
by the texts shown in exhibit no.
135. mr. barber clearly knew as early as january 29, that they were
“…completely messing the city up.” “we fucked this town up.” “it's already
locked, we train wrecked it.” similarly, in speaking about slow rolls, barber
said; “really good, train wrecked traffic”. there were numerous videos and
photos depicting mr. barber circulating on ottawa streets that were clearly
blocked or obstructed by demonstrators and vehicles during the demonstration.
mr. barber clearly knew what was going on in the streets of ottawa.
it was found that there
was more than one group involved in the convoy movement as groups of trucks and
persons came to ottawa from various parts of the country. i accepted the
evidence that mr barber was not able to influence or control all the truckers
and even some with within his own group, as was shown in some of the text
exchanges with constable bach.
ms. lich’s primary role was as a
spokesperson and fundraiser, managing gofundme and givesendgo campaigns. she
was also said to be publicly the face of the freedom convoy movement and the
spark that lit the fire of this freedom convoy.
on a social media post, ms. lich
says; “
so
please, if you can donate, and keep these truckers going, you know we plan to
be here for the long haul, as long as it takes to ensure your rights and
freedoms are restored. the purpose of those funds is to allow the truckers to
stay longer in ottawa and keep the protest going in the form that it was,
blocking the roads”
.
ms. lich, when speaking to
her followers and in social media about the convoy, repeatedly said that they
should; “hold the line, we will hold the line”. she also encouraged people and
truckers to come to ottawa and join and participate with them. as a leader and
the face of the convoy when she said; “hold the line” or “stay where you are”
and encouraging people to stay, it meant something, she had influence.
importantly when ms. lich said these things, she was aware the streets were blocked,
and people were being affected by that blockade. as she was seen in amongst the
trucks and protestors in photos and social media.
ms. lich did not have a vehicle in
ottawa, emitting exhaust fumes, nor did she honk a horn or block the egress to
a building. but as a leader of the freedom convoy 2022, she was standing
shoulder-to-shoulder with the truckers, both literally at times and
figuratively.
ms. lich had no direct contact with
any civilian witnesses called by the crown during the protest. during both her
arrest and that of chris barber, they were compliant and arrested without
incident. both seemed to appreciate leading up to their arrest on february 17,
that their arrest was imminent as shown in social media and texts. both accused
made statements urging followers to respect law enforcement and remain
peaceful.
both accused always advocated for
non-violent peaceful, lawful protest in their public statements and social
media posts.
ms. lich responded to mayor watson’s
letter as president of the freedom convoy, agreeing to a plan to reduce the
protest footprint to alleviate the impact on residents by moving trucks out of
residential areas. in ms. lich’s response to the letter, she acknowledges their
actions were disturbing some citizens and businesses but says that was never
our intent. the mayor corresponded with that group because they were seen to be
the broad moderate group of the convoy.
on february 13, mr. barber attended a
meeting with city officials to implement the truck relocation plan. on february
14, one hundred and two vehicles, including forty heavy trucks, were moved out
of residential areas. city officials confirmed that the freedom convoy kept its
end of the agreement. the plan was thwarted at the direction of then ottawa
police chief sloly. also mr. barber worked at times with cst. bach to open
streets and facilitate emergency access and assist with issues that arose. both
accused demonstrated a willingness to cooperate with authorities in reducing
the protest’s impact.
chris barber was actively involved in
logistics, liaising with police, and coordinating truck movements and arranging
for fuel and porta potties for the truckers who were part of the freedom
convoy. he had direct contact with police liaison officers bach and blonde and
city officials, particularly kim ayotte when they were attempting to move
trucks to reduce the footprint in the downtown core.
chris barber at times expressed
frustration with protestors who did not follow directions, indicating he had
limited control over some truckers and groups of truckers.
by february 4, as set out
in exhibit no. 127, the ottawa police made their position clear that they were
implementing a surge and containment policy to restore order and prevent
unlawful activity. mr. barber clearly understood, as shown in his responses to
cst. bach. the court found that by february 4, it was clearly conveyed by ops
that they had crossed the line and were engaging in unlawful conduct.
mr. barber used social media to
coordinate logistics and rally support and get the message out to his followers.
on february 9, mr. barber posted a tiktok video – exhibit no. 24, instructing
truckers to sound their horns if police approached, despite a court order
prohibiting horn use. mr. barber acknowledged the order and deliberately
encouraged others to breach the order.
findings of fact –
carter
evidentiary ruling (relevant to sentence)
the crown alleged five conspiracies
involving mischief, intimidation, obstruction, and counselling unlawful acts.
the court found no conspiracy or
common unlawful agreement proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
carter
application was
dismissed due to insufficient evidence of a specific unlawful agreement between
lich and barber. statements made by one accused could not be admitted against
the other under the co-conspirator exception.
at para. 47, the court found that
while there was some collaboration between
ms. lich and mr. barber, the
precise scope and extent of that collaboration, however, was unclear.
at para. 48, ms. lich’s
communications were primarily focused on fundraising through gofundme and
givesendgo. there was no evidence that she blocked any streets, operated a
vehicle in ottawa, honked a horn, or emitted diesel fumes. none of the
witnesses at trial had personal interactions with her, except for police
officers during her arrest, during which she was entirely compliant.
at para. 50, by january 28, 2022, inspector
lucas thought the protest had grown to include up to thirteen identified
groups, in addition to numerous individuals acting independently.
at para. 52, inspector lucas
testified that during the planning phase, protestors were cooperative with
police. there were no red flags identified en route, and police attempted to
divert vehicles to mitigate the impact on the city.
at paras. 63 - 64, text message
exchanges between mr. barber and cst. bach supports the conclusion that mr.
barber did not have control over all protest participants.  mr. barber made
repeated efforts to manage horn honking and move trucks, expressing frustration
with non-compliance. he stated; “i can plan all i want. you have seen no one
tells them what to do.” and “if i could pick each one up and move them i
would.” these communications demonstrate barber’s efforts to mitigate
disruption, despite limited authority over participants.
at para. 67, in her response to the mayor's
letter of february 12, ms. lich shows her awareness of the protest’s impact on
downtown residents and businesses. she indicated that the board had a plan to
reduce that impact. mr. barber’s attendance at meetings and his involvement in
moving trucks constituted the strongest evidence of collaboration between the
two regarding the alleged mischief.
at para. 68, on february 14, 2022,
pursuant to an agreement with the city of ottawa, one hundred and two vehicles
and forty heavy trucks were moved from residential areas to wellington street
and other designated locations. mr. ayotte and inspector lucas confirmed that
the freedom convoy fulfilled their obligations under the agreement, although
the chief of police later terminated its implementation.
at para. 69, mr. barber worked with the
police at times to open various streets, further demonstrating efforts to
reduce disruption.
at para. 75, regarding the january 29
text exchange between ms. lich and mr. barber, the court found no evidence
identifying the so-called “command centre” or its members. there was no
indication that ms. lich agreed with any strategy attributed to it. the term
“gridlock” was not used by ms. lich, and her agreement with the city to move
trucks contradicted any suggestion of an unlawful plan.
at para. 77, the evidence confirmed a
lack of a plan upon arrival in ottawa. more vehicles arrived than anticipated,
and ottawa police directed them where to go, several factors came together that
resulted in the downtown core being overwhelmed. texts referencing overnight
parking and barber saying he was going to call his high-level police contacts
further illustrated the absence of a coordinated strategy.
at para. 78, mr. barber’s cooperation
with the police and ms. lich’s agreement with the mayor to move vehicles to
staging areas were not indicative of an unlawful agreement to obstruct or
interfere with lawful property use.
at para. 83, there was no evidence of
a coordinated plan or unlawful agreement between ms. lich and mr. barber to obstruct
property, except for the agreement with the mayor to relocate trucks, which was
contrary to any unlawful intent.
at para. 89, both ms. lich and mr.
barber made statements encouraging their followers to cooperate with law
enforcement.
at para. 97, ms. lich consistently
emphasized that the protest must remain peaceful and lawful. she advised
followers to report misconduct to the police. mr. barber echoed this message
and distanced himself from inappropriate actions, such as flag burning. he also
worked with the police at times to clear access near residential buildings.
at para. 100, the court found that
mr. barber may have engaged in activities beyond the scope of any agreement
with ms. lich, particularly regarding truck operations. he could not be
considered her agent in those matters.
iii.  submissions of
counsel
crown submissions
crown counsel submitted
that the offences committed by ms. lich and mr. barber were of an unprecedented
scale and impact, warranting a sentence in the upper range of the
criminal
code
’s
ten-year maximum for mischief. the crown emphasized that while the
protest may have begun lawfully, it evolved into a sustained and organized
disruption of public order, with significant consequences for residents,
businesses, and municipal operations in ottawa.
the crown argued that the
accused were
not
being prosecuted for their beliefs, but for the means they employed to express
those beliefs. it was submitted that both accused, through their leadership
roles and public messaging, counselled others
to
remain in ottawa
and continue the protest, despite being aware of its unlawful consequences.
the crown relied heavily
on the principles of denunciation and deterrence, citing the need to send a
clear message that
political protest cannot cross into criminality without consequence. the
crown referenced the invocation of the
emergencies act
, municipal and
provincial states of emergency, and the financial costs incurred by the city of
ottawa ($7 million) and ottawa police service ($55 million) as indicative of
the gravity of the offences.
victim and community
impact statements were tendered, describing
economic losses, emotional distress,
and disruption of essential services. the crown acknowledged that some
statements were prepared for civil proceedings but maintained they were
relevant to the sentencing context.
in respect of mr. barber,
the crown emphasized his
additional conviction for counselling disobedience of a court
order and pointed to his text messages referencing gridlock and disruption, arguing
that these demonstrated a deliberate disregard for lawful authority.
the crown submitted that
while both accused made
some efforts to cooperate with authorities, these were limited
and insufficient to mitigate the overall impact of their conduct. the crown
sought a sentence of eight years imprisonment for mr. barber and a similarly
lengthy seven-year custodial sentence for ms. lich.
defence submissions – on
behalf of chris barber
defence counsel for mr.
barber submitted that the crown’s proposed sentence of eight years imprisonment
was excessive, unfit, and disproportionate, particularly considering mr.
barber’s lack of criminal record, cooperation with police, and efforts to
mitigate the impact of the protest.
ms. magas emphasized that
mr. barber was a first-time offender, with deep family roots in stewart valley,
saskatchewan, where he resides on land homesteaded by his great-grandfather
since 1905. he is a father of four, including two stepchildren, and has
operated a cross-border trucking business for over thirty years, with
approximately 60% of his work involving travel to the united states.
counsel submitted that mr.
barber’s moral blameworthiness was significantly reduced by several factors: he
sought legal advice throughout the protest, albeit from non-criminal lawyers;
he cooperated with police, including moving his truck “big red” to exit 88 on
february 8, 2022; he attempted to reduce the protest footprint, as evidenced by
text exchanges with constable bach; and his attendance at meetings with city
officials.
mr. barber did not
advocate violence or destruction of property, and his social media messaging
consistently emphasized peaceful protest and cooperation with law enforcement
on arrest. though on at least one occasion, he used social media to mislead
police into thinking the convoy was moving to toronto. he said he was playing
cat and mouse.
ms. magas referenced the
carter
ruling, in which the court found no conspiracy or common unlawful design
between mr. barber and ms. lich. this, she argued, was a critical distinction
from other protest-related mischief cases involving deliberate planning of
unlawful conduct.
counsel submitted that mr.
barber’s conduct must be assessed in the context of the unprecedented nature of
the protest, which arose during a period of covid-19 lockdowns, public
frustration, and grassroots mobilization. she noted that mr. barber was
perceived by many as a hero, and that he received numerous letters of support
from family, community members, and even his ex-wife and her husband.
the defence highlighted
the collateral consequences mr. barber has already suffered: his personal bank
account was frozen for two to three months under the
emergencies act
. he
incurred over $40,000 in travel expenses attending court.
he faces ongoing civil
litigation, with a class action lawsuit seeking damages in the hundreds of
millions.
he was subject to strict
bail conditions for over three years, including a $100,000 bond.
ms. magas requested an
absolute discharge, arguing that any criminal record would likely jeopardize
mr. barber’s ability to continue his cross-border business. in the alternative,
she submitted that a suspended sentence or conditional sentence would be
appropriate, noting that mr. barber poses no danger to society, has complied
with all bail conditions, and has demonstrated rehabilitative potential.
submissions on behalf of
ms. tamara lich
defence counsel for ms.
lich submitted that her conviction was based on recklessness, not intent, and
that her conduct was consistently peaceful and lawful.
mr. greenspon argued that the crown’s assertion that it was prosecuting the
“means” rather than the “beliefs” of ms. lich was facile and inaccurate, as the
means she advocated were peaceful and lawful throughout.
mr. greenspon identified
five distinguishing factors that set ms. lich apart from other protest leaders:
she never advocated violence or unlawful conduct; she did not control other
groups or individuals who acted unlawfully; she made unprecedented efforts to
mitigate the impact of the protest, including responding positively to mayor
watson’s request to reduce the footprint; she cooperated with police, albeit
indirectly, through communications and coordination; the protest had a positive
societal impact, as evidenced by over five hundred and ninety-two pages of
letters of support, many of which described lives changed, hope restored, and
peaceful civic engagement.
mr. granger emphasized the
relevance of the
carter
ruling, which found no criminal plan or
conspiracy, thereby distinguishing ms. lich’s case from precedent mischief
cases involving deliberate unlawful conduct. he argued that ms. lich’s moral
blameworthiness was significantly attenuated, and that her messaging
consistently emphasized peaceful, lawful protest.
counsel detailed ms.
lich’s personal background and hardship. she is a mother of three and
grandmother of four, with a fifth grandchild expected in december 2025.
she lost her job in june
2022 and has since completed a crisis and recovery coaching certificate.
she spent forty-nine days
in custody, on release was subject to strict bail conditions for 3.5 years.
she received hate mail and
death threats, though supportive messages outnumbered hate mail .
mr. granger submitted that
ms. lich’s case was factually and legally distinguishable from precedent cases
and that the principles of restraint and proportionality mandated an absolute
discharge.
iv. victim and community
impact statements
the crown tendered a
series of victim and community impact statements as part of its sentencing
materials, which were referenced in oral submissions and summarized in the
crown’s written brief. these statements were not read into the record but were
filed and reviewed by the court. defence counsel raised concerns regarding the
form, provenance, and relevance of certain statements, particularly those prepared
for civil proceedings or the public order emergency commission (“poec”).
the court acknowledges
that victim impact statements (“vis”) are admissible under
s. 722
of the
criminal
code
, and that community impact statements may be considered where they relate
to the offence and its consequences. i find to that extent they are relevant. i
find however the vis of persons who testified at this trial or those
specifically prepared for this sentencing hearing of greater relevance and
consideration. in general, the court must assess the weight and reliability of
each statement, particularly where the statements were prepared for parallel
civil litigation or public inquiries, and not specifically for the sentencing
hearing.
the court notes that only three
of the twelve statements explicitly name ms. lich and mr. barber on their cover
pages. several others were unsigned, unaffiliated with the criminal
proceedings, or prepared in affidavit form for the zexi li class action
lawsuit, which seeks over $300 million in damages. these include statements
from michelle groulx, dave smythe, and genevieve dumas, among others. while
these documents provide context, they are not direct evidence of harm
attributable to the accused and must be treated with caution.
the court also received
institutional reports from the city of ottawa and the ottawa police service,
filed as part of the poec. these reports estimate the cost of the protest at $7
million for the city and $55 million for the ottawa police. while these figures
are not determinative of sentencing, they do provide a general sense of the
scale and disruption.
the court gives greater
weight to statements from individuals who testified at trial or whose
experiences were corroborated by evidence. for example, vivian leir, who
testified, described the impact on st. andrew’s church, including loss of
access to community space, garbage and feces on the property, and ongoing
trauma. she reported feeling threatened and continues to experience anxiety
when seeing trucks with flags.
statements from local
businesses such as the lord elgin hotel and château laurier described financial
losses, staffing disruptions, and security concerns. the lord elgin reported
losing two-thirds of its income, while the château laurier described delivery
issues, guest complaints and non-compliance with public health guidelines. both
establishments reported harassment of staff and an atmosphere of lawlessness.
the loss of income etc. is hard to quantify given the challenges and lack of
interest in travel during covid.
shelters and social
service agencies including the shepherds of good hope, salvation army booth
centre and cornerstone housing described significant impacts on vulnerable
populations. the shepherds of good hope were unable to operate their outreach
van, and the salvation army reported that low-income families could not access
food banks. staff and residents reported feeling unsafe, experiencing
harassment, and suffering mental health deterioration due to noise and
disruption.
the national arts centre
(“nac”) reported cancelling or postponing forty live shows and rehearsals,
resulting in economic loss and disruption to cultural programming. the vanier
bia (“vanier business improvement area”), represented by nathalie carrière,
described widespread fear, loss of clientele and staff access issues. ms.
carrière stated that “the entire city felt under siege.”
the court also received a
statement from the château lafayette, describing the protest as financially
devastating during an already slow season. the business reported loss of
income, delivery disruptions, and staffing challenges.
while the court recognizes
that not all residents and businesses were negatively impacted, and that some
individuals and businesses expressed support for the protest, the preponderance
of evidence demonstrates that the protest caused substantial harm to the quiet
enjoyment of property, economic stability, and public safety in downtown
ottawa.
the court is mindful of
the principle articulated in
r. v. theriault
,
2021 onsc 1234
, that
community impact statements must not attribute the crimes of others to the
accused. accordingly, the court has carefully distinguished between general
protest-related harm and harm directly attributable to the actions of ms. lich
and mr. barber as parties and principals to the mischief. as noted in the trial
decision, there were more than one group at the convoy as well as individuals
acting on their own, the accused could not influence all groups or persons.
the court finds that the accused,
through their leadership roles, messaging, and continued encouragement of
participation, contributed to the conditions that allowed these harms to occur.
while they did not personally engage in harassment or obstruction, their
actions enabled and sustained the protest beyond the point of lawful assembly.
the court also notes that
both accused made efforts to mitigate harm, including responding to mayor
watson’s letter and participating in the relocation of vehicles. these efforts
are acknowledged as mitigating factors, but do not negate the overall impact of
the mischief had on the city of ottawa and many of its residents.
in conclusion, the victim
and community impact statements provide evidence of the breadth and depth of
harm caused by the protest. the court has considered these statements in
determining the gravity of the offence, the need for denunciation and
deterrence, and the appropriate sentence for each accused.
v. purpose and principles
of sentencing (sections 718 to 718.2 of the
criminal code
)
any time the court imposes
a sentence, it must abide by the principals outlined in the
criminal code
part xxii. the sentencing process is governed by the statutory framework set
out in
sections 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
. these provisions articulate
the fundamental purpose of sentencing, which is to contribute to respect for
the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society by imposing
just sanctions.
the objectives of
sentencing include: (a) denunciation of unlawful conduct; (b) deterrence of the
offender and others; (c) separation of offenders from society where necessary;
(d) rehabilitation; (e) reparation to victims and the community; and (f)
promotion of responsibility in offenders.
these objectives must be
balanced considering the nature of the offence, the degree of responsibility of
the offender, and the broader societal context. in protest-related offences,
the court must be particularly mindful of the need to denounce unlawful conduct
while respecting the constitutional protections afforded to peaceful assembly
and expression.
section 718.1 codifies the
principle of proportionality, requiring that a sentence be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
section 718.2 sets out
additional principles, including the requirement to consider aggravating and
mitigating circumstances, parity among similar offenders, restraint in the
deprivation of liberty, and the consideration of all reasonable sanctions other
than imprisonment.
these principles reflect a
presumption of restraint, particularly for first-time offenders, and emphasize
the importance of individualized sentencing. the court must consider not only
the seriousness of the offence, but also the offender’s personal circumstances,
moral blameworthiness, and potential for rehabilitation.
the crown relies on
the
case of
r. v. solowan
2008 scc 62
for the principle that the worst
offender principle no longer operates as constraint on the imposition of a
maximum sentence where appropriate. noting though that a maximum penalty of any
kind will be imposed only rarely.
in
r. v. solowan
,
the appellant argued that the trial judge had erred in imposing the maximum
allowable sentence without first finding that; “he was the worst offender who
had committed the worst offence”. supreme court found at para. 3: “the worst
offender, worst offence principle invoked by the appellant in the court of
appeal has been laid to rest. it no longer operates as a constraint on the
imposition of a maximum sentence where the maximum sentence is otherwise
appropriate, bearing in mind the principles of sentence set out in part xxiii
of the
criminal code
. unwarranted resort to maximum sentences is
adequately precluded by a proper application of those principles, notably, the
fundamental principle of proportionality set out in s. 718.1 of the
code
,
and parliament’s direction in
s. 718.2
(d) and (e) to impose the least
restrictive sanction appropriate in the circumstances: see
r. v gladue
2scr 688
. this case points out the importance of the application of the
framework for sentencing set out by the
criminal code
as they act as a
safeguard against imposition of the maximum sentences only where required using
that framework.
the court reaffirmed the
principle of
proportionality
under
s. 718.1
of the
criminal code
, and the requirement under
s.
718.2
(d) and (e) to impose the least restrictive sanction appropriate in the
circumstances.
proportionality is decided
both on an individual basis in relation to the offender themselves and the
offence committed, and by comparison with sentences imposed for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances. as noted by the supreme court of
canada in
r. v lacasse
at para. 53; “individualization and parity of
sentence must be reconciled for a sentence to be proportionate”.
the supreme court of
canada in
r. v. bissonnette
2022 scc 23
at para.
50
provided guidance on
the “cardinal principle of sentencing” when it stated: “but sentencing must in
all circumstances be guided by the cardinal principle of proportionality. the
sentence must be severe enough to denounce the offence that must not exceed”
what is just and appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender
and the gravity of the offence “… the application of this principle assures the
public that the offender deserves the punishment received.
vi. collateral
consequences
the supreme court in
r.
v. nasogaluak
,
2010 scc 6
, and
r. v. suter
,
2018
scc 34
, held that state misconduct, collateral consequences, and public
scrutiny may justify a reduced sentence. in
r. v. el-azrak
,
2021
onca 817
, the ontario court of appeal affirmed that collateral
consequences—such as loss of livelihood—may render a sentence disproportionate.
barber’s business relies
on cross-border trucking (60% of operations). a criminal record would
jeopardize his livelihood and employees’ jobs. he has incurred $40,000 in legal
travel costs, had his bank accounts frozen, and faces a $900 million civil
lawsuit. lich has served forty-nine days in jail, endured strict bail
conditions and faced public vilification. these consequences are significant
and relevant to the sentencing analysis.
in
r. v. nasogaluak
,
2010 scc 6
, the court held that state misconduct and
collateral
consequences may mitigate sentence, even absent a charter breach. this
principle was echoed in
r. v. el-azrak,
2023 onca 440
, where the court
of appeal recognized that collateral consequences, may justify a reduced
sentence.  counsel for mr. barber argues that the impact on mr. barber’s
employment is such a collateral consequence.
vii. relevant case law:
freedom convoy cases
the court reviewed a range
of precedent decisions to assess the appropriate sentencing range and
principles applicable to protest-related mischief offences. there are few
reported cases arising from the freedom convoy prosecutions and few comparable
cases. most of the cases other than
r. v king
o.j. 848
, involves
persons involved in the protest but not in a leadership capacity.
in
r. v. king
o.j. 848 (onsc)
, the accused
pat king
was convicted of the
offences of mischief and counselling mischief, counselling obstructing police,
disobey court order and counselling to disobey court order. these charges arose
in the context of the mr. king’s participation in the freedom convoy. the court
found that mr. king  planned prior to the arrival of the freedom convoy, to
gridlock downtown ottawa and to cause distress to residents, merchants and
workers by continuous honking of truck horns, blocking streets and other
disruptive activities and to prolong the occupation indefinitely until the
groups political demands were addressed to their satisfaction.
the court at para. 3,
found
mr. king’s
continuing online presence throughout the freedom
convoy and prior to arriving in ottawa, justified a finding that he was an
organizer and leader of a significant component of the convoy. he encouraged
his followers to use their vehicles to blockade downtown streets and counselled
them to “hold the line” in the face of efforts by the police to encourage
protesters to leave the city. the court found he was “a leader, an organizer,
and on-line influencer” of the freedom convoy and in that capacity aided and
abetted and was part of a joint purpose of freedom convoy participants to
commit mischief.
in addition, the court
found
king
counselled his online followers to continue to honk their
horns in contravention of a civil injunction issued by the superior court of
justice and encouraged his followers to resist certain police actions and to
continue to “hold the line”.
the court found that
mr.
king
made it clear in his social media remarks that the freedom convoy’s
mission was to pressure the government to abandon vaccine mandates and to
achieve this result by occupying downtown ottawa and continuing the occupation
until the government acted on their demands. the court commented that the
occupation of downtown ottawa was not simply a result of the freedom convoy
growing out of control after its arrival. it was, at least in part, a result of
king’s
and other convoy organizer’s admonitions to protesters, before
they set out for ottawa in their vehicles to, in
king’s
words, encircle
and “peacefully bear hug” the city. in other words, in relation to the mischief
which ensued, there was an element of planning and premeditation on
mr.
king’s
part.
the crown sought a
sentence of nine years for the offence of mischief and one year for the offence
counselling disobey court order for a total sentence of ten years. defence
counsel suggested that a proper sentence, given the pre-sentence credit of
about nine months, would be time served, plus three years’ probation or a
conditional sentence order, plus probation.  as in the case before me, the
positions of the crown and defence were very far apart.
the court commenting on
the purpose and principles of sentence noted at para. 10; “notably, the
circumstances of this case do not implicate these aggravating factors, nor any
of the others mentioned in
section 718.2
(such as spousal violence, abuse of
minors, and breach of trust in relation to the victim)”. this should be kept in
mind when assessing the crown’s submission that this is the “worst case of
mischief” and thus deserving of a uniquely severe punishment.
similar arguments were
made in the
king
case as in this case notably, the crown argued; “on a
sliding scale of seriousness and moral culpability, this is the worst case of
mischief even though the maximum sentence does not require the worst offence or
offender. the counselling to disobey a court order and obstruction of police
was also done in unprecedented circumstances of a municipal, provincial, and
national emergency. for the first time in canadian history, the downtown core
of the nation’s capital was occupied and gridlocked for three weeks, causing
significant suffering to its residents, until the occupation was forcefully
cleared by a multijurisdictional police force. the cost to the city of ottawa,
including police was over $30 million. pat king was an organizer and leader of
this occupation who also counselled obstruction of police and disobeying a court
order. the purpose of this occupation was to force a change in government
policy by non-democratic means. the impact on the community, including loss of
confidence in the rule of law, was significant.
the crown argued that
there was a very strong need for general deterrence to prevent crimes as a
method for achieving political change, particularly in the nation’s capital. it
is suggested that the sentence “must serve as a powerful deterrent… those that
who attempt to disrupt democratic processes and undermine societal order
through unlawful actions will face consequences that ensure such behaviour is
not repeated”.
the crown, as in our case,
argued the circumstances of
mr. king’s
case were unique: “there is no
sentence precedent for a similar offender who committed the offensives in
similar circumstances… there has never been an occupation of downtown ottawa,
or any city in canada, for three weeks, where the organizer and leader of the
mischief has also counselled disobeying a court order and obstruction of police”.
in our case, the accused were not found guilty of obstruction of justice,
however.
the court agreed that
mr.
king’s
actions in counselling and committing mischief required a sentence
emphasizing the objectives of general deterrence and denunciation but also
found the court must also respect the fundamental objective of proportionality
by considering the sentencing ranges applied in comparable cases.
justice hackland found the
“
coutts border crossing
cases to be very relevant” and mentioned the
billings
case also arising from the freedom convoy.  mr. billings was an associate of
mr.
king;
he plead guilty to counselling to commit mischief receiving the
agreed upon sentence of six months’ time served plus six months’ probation
requiring him to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
justice hackland agreed
that a fit and just sentence must send a message of denunciation and as a
warning to others who seek to force their views on government by pressuring
downtown residents and workers. at the same time however, he found that
adherence to the fundamental principle of proportionality must be respected. an
accused must receive a sentence that can be seen to be like sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.
justice hackland found
that circumstances of the
king
case were more serious than the
coutts
blockade cases, and the ottawa protest was longer lasting and broader in scope.
he found at para. 29:
“the freedom convoy protesters in the present case blockaded downtown ottawa
for a period of three weeks, involved thousands of protesters and hundreds of
commercial trucks which targeted the civilian population living and working in
the downtown area. it went well beyond blocking streets and included incessant
honking of truck horns intended to harass the public and disrupt businesses.
this had a particularly insidious effect on vulnerable parts of the population
– people with disabilities, children, the elderly, those in shelters and
dependent on food banks.”
several mitigating factors
were also noted in
r. v king
at para. 30:
•
king personally
organized and led the “slow role” to the ottawa airport and then onto highway
417. this tied up traffic for several hours but, on the evidence tendered in
this trial, the “slow role” was a temporary nuisance not amounting to a major
event;
•
he belatedly dropped
his “hold the line” rhetoric in favour of an admonition to his online listeners
to drive away from the city and regroup at a rural location west of the city,
advice which was apparently ignored by other protesters. this was an attempt to
avoid confrontation with police that he knew was imminent;
•
apart from one man who
joined the ‘slow roll’, none of the other crown witnesses interacted at all
with king and their evidence was therefore about the freedom convoy in general;
•
essentially no violence
or property damage occurred over the three weeks of the protest and indeed king
counselled against violence in very direct and blunt terms in his on-line
broadcasts. this massive demonstration involving large commercial trucks and a
diverse group of people, some with extreme political views, carried with it a
significant risk of violence and property damage, neither of which occurred.
king advocated forcefully against such conduct and can be credited as a
positive influencer, in significant respects;
•
apart from a group of
truckers and their supporters from alberta, king was not particularly
well-known to protesters in ottawa. defence witness daniel bulford identified
certain individual operational leaders of the convoy, whom he described as “the
face of the protest” and king was not among them. indeed, no crown witnesses,
not even members of the plt team, had any substantial interactions personally
with king during the blockade;
•
in short, king was on
the periphery of the leadership group, once it arrived in ottawa and his
on-line messaging as the protest continued contained significant ‘avoid
violence and obey the law’ messaging which may have helped to mitigate or
contain what could have been a far worse situation;
•
king’s period of actual
incarceration involved frequent lock downs, a serious infection issue with his
prothesis and intimidation by other inmates; and
•
community impact
statements suggest protestors frightened and intimated residents of a woman’s
shelter and workers in a food bank. there is no evidence that mr. king had any
knowledge of these events.
after considering, the
aggravating as well as the mitigating factors,
pat king
was sentenced to
a three-month conditional sentence in addition to his presentence custody
calculated to be nine months of presentence custody. so, in fact, the court
considered a fit and appropriate sentence to be a twelve-month sentence. as
part of the conditional sentence, he was placed on house arrest and 100 hours
of community service hours.  mr. king was precluded from contact with several
persons including tamara lich and christopher barber, he was not to be in
ottawa except for required court appearances or consult with a lawyer on legal
matters, he was precluded from participating in public demonstrations involving
twenty or more people.
justice hackland cautioned
against punitive sentences in political protest cases, stating at para. 31:
“
respectfully, the court does not accept the crown’s
characterization of mr. king’s role in the freedom convoy as ‘the worst case of
mischief on a sliding scale of seriousness and moral culpability’. in the
court’s opinion there is a social harm to unduly elevating the sentencing goals
of denunciation and deterrence in the context of political protests, to result
in punitive sentences at the top of the sentencing range. the risk is that an
overly severe sentence of imprisonment in the context of legitimate constitutionally
protected activity can have the effect of creating a chill or a fear of
participation in political expression such as demonstrations or protests, for
fear that some persons may cross the line into conduct constituting mischief
with resultant severe sentences for all involved. the freedom convoy protest
was about expressing opposition held by some to perceived government overreach
in the form of covid 19 mandates and other vaccine issues, which continue to be
matters of legitimate public discourse and shifting opinions and policy
approaches. the freedom convoy was not an attack aimed at, for example,
promoting violence or intimidation of racial or religious minorities or other
vulnerable groups. rather, the freedom convoy began as a lawful constitutionally
protected form of protest that unfortunately grew out of control and was
allowed to go on and on and morphed into criminal activity (in the form of
mischief and related offences). but in the court’s opinion neither the freedom
convoy nor mr. king’s role in it constituted the worst case of mischief.”
there are certainly some
parallels between the
king
case and the case at bar. there were however
evidentiary differences between the two trials. the court found
king
planned prior to arriving in the city to gridlock the city and cause distress
to its citizens. the court found
king
encouraged truckers to peacefully
bear hug the city and found an amount of planning and premeditation on mr.
king’s part. that finding was not made by this court.
mr. king
incited his followers to
engage in defiance and obstruction, whereas at least as of february 12, 2022,
lich and barber attempted to negotiate with authorities to reduce the footprint
and consistently emphasized co-operation with authorities. mr. barber had also
assisted cst. bach in opening emergency lanes and moving some vehicles prior to
that date.
both mr. barber and ms.
lich disassociated themselves from mr. king soon after arriving in ottawa due
to his messaging, and there is no evidence that they engaged in similar
conduct. mr. king, ms. lich and mr. barber advocated against use of violence.
mr. king
was found to be on the
periphery of the leadership group and was not the face of the convoy as
attributed to ms. lich and nor was he seen as a high-profile leader the way mr.
barber and “big red” were identified.
albeit, when enforcement
and arrest was imminent,
mr. king
dropped his “hold the line” rhetoric
in favour of an admonition to his social media followers to drive away from the
city and regroup at a rural location west of the city. although mr. barber did
in fact move his truck out of the city as requested by cst. bach on february 8,
2022, and while a few trucks went with him, there is no evidence either mr.
baber or ms. lich ever made a large-scale social media broadcast telling people
to leave the city.
as noted, apart from the
king
decision, there are few other relevant freedom convoy decisions. in
r. v.
billings
, “freedom george”, who worked closely with
king
during the
protests pleaded guilty to one count of counselling mischief in relation to the
freedom convoy. justice maranger imposed a sentence of six months’
incarceration, equivalent to time served. he also received six months of
probation. this was a joint position. this case is unreported but summarized in
r. v. king
at para.16.
in
r v.
koncz
, 2024 oncj no 3516,
justice brown imposed a twelve-month
conditional discharge and a $2000 fine where the accused had been directed to
leave as per police directive and continued protesting. justice brown reasoned
that the mischief had to be understood in the context of the convoy and that it
was serious. the accused had planned to travel from calgary to ottawa to
participate. his sentence was mitigated by certain
charter
breaches, as
well as evidence about his character and employment. he played no leadership
role. this case is summarized in
r v. van huigenbos
at para. 55.
coutts blockade cases
the coutts border crossing
blockade occurred during much the same time frame as the freedom convoy in 2022
and was also in response to protesting covid mandates, hence there is some
relevance to this body of case law. the decision of
r. v van huigenbos
contains a helpful general review of protest cases and their sentencing
principles involving g-20, abortion clinic protests, clayoquot sound protests,
transmountain pipeline, pig farm, logging protests, and the coutts blockade.
in
r. v. van huigenbos
and jansen
,
2025 abkb 14
(yamauchi, j.)
, the accused were convicted of
mischief by a jury for their participation in the coutts border crossing
blockade which occurred between january 29, 2022, and february 14, 2022,
(approximately  just over two weeks) so more or less simultaneously with the
freedom convoy mischief in ottawa. the protestors blocked the highway at an
important u.s. border crossing. the accused were convicted of aiding and
abetting the protestors committing the mischief by providing supplies and food
and negotiated with the rcmp.
mr. van huigenbos
was also found to have
played a leadership role in the border blockade. the court emphasized the need
for denunciation and deterrence in applying the sentencing principles.
the court found the
blockade to be potentially dangerous and had a serious impact on the community
and caused considerable inconvenience. the court sentenced
huigenbos
to
four months imprisonment.
mr. janzen
received a conditional sentence of
ninety days duration, despite both accused assisting police.
mr. van
huigenbos
assisted police in maneuvering through the gauntlet of trucks and
tractors.
mr. jansen
assisted police from time to time in having
vehicles moved.
justice yamauchi
in
van
huigenbos
at para.
23
made the following comments which are relevant to the
case at bar also. the court states:
clearly, the
protesters, and the offenders felt they had a legitimate cause they were
pursuing. that cause is not the issue. it is the method by which they chose to
promote their cause that was illegal. they had legal means to express their
concern with the covid-19 mandates and those who imposed them on canadians.
they could undertake peaceful protests that did not obstruct the lawful use,
enjoyment, and operation of highway 4. they could invite meaningful discussion
with their elected representatives, which they appeared to have started. they
could attempt to boycott businesses that supported the governmental policies.
instead, they undertook the vigilante approach of taking over a portion of
highway 4 and shutting it down until their demands were met. this approach was
exhibited by their overt criticism of government, such as mr. van huigenbos’
speech in which he said the prime minister could not even cross the border.
in
van huigenbos
,
the court at para.
70
also cites the sentencing decision of
r. v. pawlowski
(unreported
september 18 ,2023).
mr. pawlowski
was sentenced to sixty days
incarceration for attending a saloon near the coutts border crossing to give a
speech encouraging the protesters to continue with the protest and inviting
others to join in the blockade.
justice
krinke found that
pawlowski
committed mischief by inciting the protesters to continue the blockade, noting
at p.19; “the significant number of people affected by the blockade, and the
time period over which the blockade continued, extended the potential harm and
therefore the gravity of the offence”.  justice krinke also observed:
... [w]hen legitimate protest
crosses the line into illegal activities, it becomes an attack on the essential
values of democracy; that is no one is above the law, and everyone must abide
by the law. this attack on essential values of democracy increases the gravity
of the offence.
an appeal to the alberta court of
appeal was dismissed,
see
r. v pawlowski,
2024 abca 342
.  the alberta
court of appeal, justice slatter in his concurring reasons stated at para. 107:
while the appellant is
correct that peaceful, lawful and nonviolent communication is entitled to
protection, blockading a highway is an inherently aggressive and potentially
violent form of conduct, designed to intimidate and impede the movement of
third parties. canadian political convention, the common law, and the charter
protect peaceful protests. however, mass obstruction of public highways is not
a form of peaceful protest. the fundamental freedoms of expression and assembly
do not encompass obstructing public highways or inciting anyone else to do so.
leave to appeal
in
pawlowski
to the supreme court of canada was later dismissed.
in
r. v. colenutt
(oral
reasons july 25, 2025), mr. colenutt pleaded guilty to possession of a weapon
for a dangerous purpose. he was in possession of a firearm while participating
in the coutts blockade. he had been charged with mischief also, but that charge
was withdrawn on his plea to possession of a firearm. mr. colenutt received a
conditional sentence of two years less a day.
at para. 72 of
van huigenbos
the
court references the decision of
r v. olienick
and
carbert
(september 9, 2024) lethbridge 220151286q4 (abkb). although those accused were
charged with a number of weapons offences in addition to mischief, the court
spent time in its decision specifically addressing the sentence for the charge
of mischief arising from the blockade.
justice labrenz found that
mr.
olienick
held a leadership role and aided the protesters by transporting
items such as food to the protesters. olienick was also a principal offender,
as he had placed his dump truck on highway 4 to block the road.
mr. carbert
was "an equal supporter, and he participated in negotiations with police
regarding the highway”:
olienick
and
carbert
, at p. 34 ll
17 - 32. justice labrenz distinguished many of the cases that the parties
placed before this court on the grounds that each case involved shorter-term
protests, with fewer protesters. he also recognized that highway 4 is a vital
economic corridor between canada and the united states and the protesters
"held the highway hostage" which was contrary to the rule of law. he
sentenced both offenders to six months incarceration, concurrent with the other
sentences he imposed on those offenders.
protest cases
in
r. v. blanchfield,
2023 oncj 45
,
mr. blanchfield
was convicted after trial with causing a
disturbance and mischief arising from a demonstration on rideau street april
29, 2022. this was a copycat demonstration of the freedom convoy. the accused
was a leader of this convoy group driving into downtown ottawa. he was the only
person encouraging the crowd to “hold the line’ from the top of his blue truck.
he had been at the freedom convoy earlier and would have been aware of the
significance of the rideau and sussex intersection. he would have been aware
the convoy he was leading would block the road to pedestrians and vehicles. he
refused to leave when directed by police.  the blockage of rideau street lasted
8 to 10 hours. the crown sought fifteen months reduced to twelve months given
pre-sentence custody and strict bail conditions. he had a prior but dated criminal
record. justice legault considered whether a period of incarceration rather
than a conditional sentence was required to have a real deterrent effect sentence
was appropriate. the court imposed a nine month a conditional sentence given
that a conditional jail sentence can be longer than a real jail sentence and
contain restrictions of liberty to add to the elements of deterrence.
r. v. soranno
,
2022 bcsc 1795
,
involved a large-scale break and enter
into a pig barn located on private property as part of an animal rights
protest. the court found that the accused deliberately engaged in unlawful
conduct to achieve political ends and emphasized the need to deter the notion
that higher moral values justify breaking the law.
animal rights activists unlawfully
occupied barns. the trial judge imposed a 30-day jail sentence. the court of
appeal substituted that for a 120-day conditional sentence.
in
r v soranno
,
2022 bcsc 1795
, justice
verhoeven makes some important general comments that are
apropos
to the
case at bar. in
soranno
, a couple, who were animal rights
activists, illegally organized a large-scale break and enter into a hog farm.
justice verhoeven said at paras. 5 - 7:
as canadians, we
are fortunate to live in a democracy. freedom of belief and expression is a
fundamental freedom under
s. 2(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and
freedoms
. the offenders and every other citizen have the right to protest,
to express themselves, and to attempt to influence others by any lawful means,
within the democratic process. they have no right to break the law.
there is no
shortage of people who believe that their cause is just, who are impatient with
democratic processes, and who believe that higher moral values should entitle
them to disobey the law in furtherance of their goals. however, as s. 718 of
the
code
states, the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect
society and contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society. allowing citizens to break the law as they see fit
in order to achieve political objectives is anathema to the maintenance of a
just, peaceful and safe society.
further at paras. 87 to 90
of
r. v soranno
, the court addresses proportionality, gravity of the
offence and degree of responsibility of the offender stating:
in the
circumstances of this case, the gravity of the offence relates primarily to the
harm to society and its values, rather than the harm to the victim. section 718
emphasizes the need for sentencing to contribute to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society. the offenders deliberately
organized a mass invasion and occupation of private property, lasting several
hours, in order to illegally achieve their political ends. there was a risk of
violence which, thankfully, did not occur. the offenders are not youthful. they
are intelligent, well-educated adults who fully understood what they were
doing, and that it was illegal. they felt justified in breaking the law for
what they saw as higher purposes. the moral responsibility of the offenders is
at the highest end.
the harm to
society's values lies in the pernicious and misguided idea that breaking the
law for political purposes, or higher moral purposes, is acceptable.
this kind of
behaviour must be denounced and deterred in the most emphatic of terms.
sentencing must reflect these principles.
the offence for
which the offenders have been convicted involves both breaking and entering,
and mischief. as noted, the maximum penalty for the offence is 10 years'
imprisonment.
in
soranno
as in
the case at bar, the accused asked the court to impose discharges. the court
rejected that saying at paras. 98 to 101:
the offenders both
argue that entering a conviction and saddling them with a criminal record would
be disproportionate to the gravity of the offence and their degree of
responsibility. they also argue that a criminal record will be an impediment to
them in the future. no specific circumstances are referred to in that respect,
except the possibility that a criminal record may impede their ability to cross
borders. no evidence was led in this respect…
as specific
deterrence is a concern in relation to these offenders, and the possibility of
significant adverse repercussions has not been established, i am not satisfied
that the first condition for granting a discharge is met.
in any event,
however, the second condition is not met. a discharge would be wholly
inappropriate in this case, for either offender. a discharge would be contrary
to the public interest. as i have already said, the need for general deterrence
is the most important sentencing factor in this case. discharging the
offenders, which would be akin to acquitting them, would send entirely the
wrong message to the public at large, and in particular, like-minded persons,
or potentially like-minded persons. it would undermine the public's confidence
in the administration of justice.
the court imposed a thirty-day
jail sentence plus twelve months' probation. on appeal, the court overturned
justice verhoeven's carceral sentence and imposed a longer 120-day conditional
sentences on each offender, along with a one-year term of probation:
r v
soranno
,
2024 bcca 230
.
in
r. v. drainville
(1991),
1991 canlii 13897 (on cj)
,
5 c.r. (4th) 38 (ont. prov. div.)
,
o.j. 340 (c.j.)
, justice
fournier quoted chief justice howland in saying that:
it is one of the
fundamental principles of our democratic society that no one is above the law,
and everyone is equal before the law. the rule of law is based on the fact that
our current laws represent the will of the majority of the people. if a law no
longer represents the will of the majority, then it should be changed but until
it is changed by lawful means, it must be obeyed. defiance of the law is not
the answer.
he went on to say at
paras. 88 - 90:
the harm to
society's values lies in the pernicious and misguided idea that breaking the
law for political purposes, or higher moral purposes, is acceptable. this kind
of behaviour must be denounced and deterred in the most emphatic of terms.
sentencing must reflect these principles.
in
trans mountain
pipeline v. mivasair
2018 bcsc 947
, elizabeth may, mp, a green party leader
plead guilty to criminal contempt arising from a pipeline protest this may went
to a work site of trans mountain pipeline with the intention of defying the
injunction in a manner which drew maximum attention by the media to that
defiance. she was found to have exploited her role as a member of parliament and
as a party leader to encourage others to defy the injunction. the court
emphasized her public role and professional status as a lawyer as aggravating
factors. the court found her punishment for criminal contempt must be greater
than that of persons who do not hold positions of authority and influence. they
imposed a $1500 fine rather than the $500 fine jointly recommended by counsel.
g-20 protest cases
defence counsel provided
the g-20 protest cases of
r. v. cote, henry, morano
, (g-20 cases) these
cases involved violent mischief, including arson, assault, and destruction of
property. sentences ranged from conditional discharges to twenty-one months,
often served conditionally.
in
r v. henry
,
2011 oncj 501
,
278 ccc (3d) 344
,
henry
pleaded guilty to two counts of mischief over
$5000. he was part of a group engaged in what has been referred to as
"black bloc" tactics, which caused disturbances and destroyed
property during the 2010 g20 summit in toronto.
henry
, along with other members of this
group, smashed a large, double pane starbucks window. there were many people
inside, and over $26,000 worth of damage was done. additionally, the restaurant
had to close down for two days to do repairs which cost them $6000 and had to
pay $1500 to employees for lost shifts. the crown was seeking a nine-to-twelve-month
carceral sentence. henry was seeking a suspended sentence and probation for 12
to 24 months.
henry
was a young person when he committed the offences.
since his arrest, he sought psychological counselling and undertook volunteer
community work. justice tuck-jackson
found that
henry
had
"tremendous potential for rehabilitation." he was remorseful. she
described the g20 protests as "destruction dressed up as political
protest.
because of
henry's
post-offence efforts towards rehabilitation, together
with his status as a youthful first offender, justice tuck-jackson imposed a twelve-month
conditional sentence along with twenty-four months probation.
r. v. cote
2011 oncj 778
: the
accused plead guilty to two counts of mischief for damaging two police cars
during a violent protest.
mr. cote
was described as a political
anarchist. he was also involved in tearing down fencing, burning a police car
and admitted he brought a disguise to the protest. sentence imposed was six
months imprisonment followed by probation.
r. v. morano
2014 oncj
79
: the accused engaged in numerous acts of mischief, including throwing a rock
at a police cruiser smashing the windshield, damaged a bank machine and burned
a vehicle there was over 230,000 damage attributed directly to him. victim
impact statements illustrated the significant impact the violence and property
destruction had on the community. the court imposed a jail sentence of seven
months less pretrial custody followed by two
years
probation
.
these cases involved
direct physical damage, violence, and deliberate illegal conduct. in contrast,
the conduct of lich and barber, while disruptive, was non-violent and
constitutionally motivated. the moral blameworthiness of the accused in the
g-20 cases exceeds that of the present case.
r. v dube
2018 qccq 9059
the crown
relies on
r.
v. dube
,
2018 qccq 9059
to justify its sentencing position. this case
involved sabotage of the hydro quebec grid in three different locations. this
sabotage caused 180,000 people to be without electricity in winter at mealtime.
the cities of montreal, the laurentians and montérégie as well as mcgill
university health care centre and laval police were without power. the accused
caused over $29 million in lost revenue and the unforeseen purchase of
electricity from neighbouring networks to prevent a blackout affecting all of
quebec. the crown sought a ten-year sentence.
the crown argued there was
a vengeful motive on the accused behalf to attack hydro quebec and there was a
high degree of pre-meditation and sophistication to the crime. it was argued
that the attack on this essential service warranted the maximum sentence.
the court found no
mitigating factors regarding the circumstances of the offence, but the accused
previously had a good reputation and had the accused had no prior criminal
record but there had been a previous discharge for assault and uttering death
threats. defence argued there were collateral consequences as he had been sued
civilly for $29 million dollars, experienced loss of reputation due to media
coverage, his property had been seized, and he experienced loss of income.
the court found the
maximum penalty requested by the crown to be excessive in the circumstances. it
was found that the sentence failed to take sufficient account of the personal
circumstances of the accused and did not respect the fundamental principle of
proportionality. the court also found the accused had suffered significant
collateral consequences which diminished the weight to be given to the
objective of specific deterrence. the court imposed a seven-year custodial
sentence. the present case is entirely dissimilar, involving non-violent
protest, no property damage, and no intent to harm infrastructure.
this case is
distinguishable from the case at bar.
dube’s
conduct was sophisticated
and premeditated. he had targeted hydro transmission lines in numerous
locations. his actions were done out of revenge with an aim to sabotage
critical infrastructure putting lives at risk. ms. lich and mr. barber’s
conduct, while disruptive, did not put lives at risk. they advocated against violence
and did not advocate damage to property it. there was evidence of property destruction,
and their protest began with the noblest of intentions.
parity and proportionality
parity and proportionality, as
previously noted, are important requirements in determining what is a fair and
fit sentence. i have reviewed the cases relied on by the parties and summarized
those most relevant to the case involving the accused.
the purpose is to illustrate how
courts have approached situations that are arguably "similar" to the
case at bar. the challenge in this case is that there is no case directly on
all fours with the case before the court. there are certainly some similarities
to the
king
decision as well as the coutts border crossing blockade
mischief cases, but there are also differences.
in some cases, the accused pleaded
guilty, or their role was limited, or the protest lasted for a shorter duration,
planned to cause harm or advocated violence, weapons were present etc. in the
case at bar, the accused had a trial which is their right and they are not
faulted in any way for exercising that right. it is an absence of a mitigating factor.
in the case at bar, the accused were high profile leaders of the protest, the
protest lasted more than three weeks while they did not advocate for property
damage or violence, their actions had significant effect and caused huge inconvenience
to the residents of downtown ottawa for the duration of the convoy.  this
highlights the difficulty with taking an approach that simply overlays one
factual situation to the case at bar is that each situation, and each offender,
is different from the next.
in
soranno,
the pig farm
protest case involved individuals essentially breaking into pig barns
en
masse
with media in tow, which are arguably more invasive in that target
area than not allowing people clear unencumbered passage.
similarly, are distinguishable as the
g20 summit riot cases involved significant violence and planned vandalism
including arson and other crimes against innocent business owners. some accused
wore clothing to disguise their appearance
nearly all the cases to which this
court has referred involved civil disobedience that lasted for a short period.
granted some of the protests themselves lasted for very long periods, such as
the trans mountain pipeline protests, but the offences themselves in which the
offenders were involved lasted for brief periods from the time the police
warned them of possible arrest to the arrests themselves.
in the case at bar, the freedom
convoy involving the accused lasted from january 28 to february 17,2022 (date
of their arrest) for a period of approximately three weeks. both ms. lich and
mr. barber continued to lead and organize the freedom convoy movement during
that time and were aware of the effect the blocked roads etc was having on the
residents and businesses in ottawa. the downtown core was in essence held
hostage contrary to the rule of law as described by justice lebrenz in the
olienick
and
carbert
case. the difference is that lich and barber and
their broad moderate group could not control all the groups and persons who had
congregated in ottawa during the protest, and both accused tried to mitigate or
ameliorate the situation by trying to work with authorities to reduce the footprint
of the demonstration.
the coutts border crossing blockade
took place between january 29 and february 14. so, a comparable time frame and
was also protest of covid restrictions and overreach of federal government
policies. it should be noted, in
r. v olienick and carbert
(september 9,
2024) lethbridge 220151286q4 (abkb) justice lebrenz found that
olienick
held a leadership role and aided the protesters by transporting food to them
and was also a principal offender as he placed his dump truck on highway 4.
carbert
was an equal supporter, and he participated in negotiations with authorities
regarding the highway. the judge distinguished many of the protest cases as
they involved shorter protests with fewer protests. he also recognized that
highway 4 is a vital economic corridor between canada and the united states and
that the protestors “held the highway hostage” which was contrary to the rule
of law. those accused received jail sentences of six months for mischief
offences. that sentence was to be served concurrently to weapons offences as
police had found a cache of weapons and ammunition and body armor near the
blockade. for those offences they were sentenced to six and a half years less
time spent in custody.
the freedom convoy demonstration was
broader in scope and covered a wider geographical area than the coutts blockade,
which was smaller, targeting however an important border crossing. the freedom
convoy in ottawa, involving thousands of protestors and hundreds of trucks, and
the effect went beyond the blocking of streets. the noise, honking horns and
diesel fumes in addition to the blocked roads had a deleterious on citizens and
businesses. in coutts, the blockade prevented personal and commercial vehicles
from crossing between canada and the u.s which was an important infrastructure
and a cache of weapons and ammunition was found at the blockade. so, while
there are many comparables, there are also differences.
although the cases referred to each
differ factually from the case at bar, the statement of leading principles and
the legal reasoning in application of sentences are helpful. it is those policy
considerations that will guide this court in its sentencing of each of the
individuals before it.
aggravating and mitigating factors
in any sentencing hearing
the presence of both aggravating and mitigating factors play a significant role
in determination of sentence. aggravating factors the court must consider are
set in
s. 718.2
of the
criminal code
. i have considered the following
aggravating and mitigating factors.
a. aggravating factors
leadership role
both ms. lich and mr.
barber held prominent leadership positions within the freedom convoy 2022
corporation. ms. lich served as president, and mr. barber as a director.
they attended a meeting of
organizers soon after arriving to discuss a strategy to “gridlock” the city. we
do not know the results of that discussion however and by the time of the
meeting the city was already gridlocked.
they led a significant
number group of trucks to ottawa from western canada. their roles were not just
symbolic; each of them was actively involved in organizing, messaging, and
sustaining the protest. ms. lich was primarily involved in fundraising to
sustain and maintain the protest.
they also encouraged
others to remain or to join them in ottawa to sustain the protest in the form
of blocking streets and disrupting the downtown core. they use statements on a
regular basis such as stay strong, hold the line, stay united and not give in
to fear which was said to incite their followers to continue to do what they
were doing which was the blocking of streets or continue the mischief.
although both lich and
barber worked with ops and the city to reduce the footprint, neither took steps
to end or stop the demonstration which was the disturbing the peace and quiet
enjoyment of residents of the affected areas.
as
in
r. v. van
huigenbos
, leadership in a disruptive protest is an aggravating factor,
particularly where the offender “undertook and proudly announced” their role to
police and others.
duration and scale of
offence
the protest lasted
approximately three weeks, january 28 until february18 when the enforcement and
removal operations commenced. neither ms. lich nor mr. barber left until they
were forced to by their arrests on february 17. despite receiving clear messaging
that the demonstration had become unlawful.
the sustained nature of
the disruption, including obstruction of public roads, excessive noise, diesel
odour and interference with the use and enjoyment of property, distinguishes
this case from shorter, more contained events.
impact on the community
in the messaging from
police and the mayor, both lich and baber were aware the disruption caused to
residents and businesses.in ottawa. the mayor in his letter of february 12
stated; “our residents are exhausted and on edge, and our small businesses
impacted by your blockades are teetering on the brink of permanent closure. ms.
lich in her reply to this letter acknowledged; “many of the citizens and
businesses in ottawa have been cheering us on, but we're also disturbing
others”.
february 3, 2022, at a
press conference where both lich and barber were present, a reporter stated;
“people in this town are terrified. they are fed up. they are tired of the
noise, blaring horns late at night, early in the morning. the harassment of
people on the street they want to know when you were going home”. counsel to
the freedom convoy responded; “as you just heard tamara lich answered that
question, we're not leaving till the mandates are lifted.” (exhibit no. 57 and
exhibit no. 57 at pages 3,6.)
chris barber in tiktok
videos posted on february 4, 2022, stated; “there's a few people in the high
rises that don't like the horns, and i apologize for that. i don't know what
else i can do to fix that. “(exhibit no. 18) and in another tiktok posted on
february 6; “i kind of find it hilarious, everybody, that the city of ottawa
has been freaking out. law enforcement's getting more pushy, the citizens are
pissed off. i can understand why. i absolutely 100% am on your side but we've
been here for a week over a week now... we need an audience. so, citizens of
ottawa, put pressure on your... government. come on we're all here for a
reason. we're sorry it had to happen in your city” (exhibit no.12 and 12a).
also in a news article,
barber is quoted saying; “our message to the citizens of ottawa is one of
empathy. we understand your frustration. and genuinely wish there was another
way for us to get our message across, but the responsibility for your
inconvenience flies squarely on the shoulders of politicians who have preferred
to vilify and call us names rather than exchange in respectful and serious
dialogue (exhibit no. 135, volume 1 tab 40 of page 2).
there were also numerous
text messages in exhibit no. 135 sent by barber where he said things like; “we
fucked this town up.” “we are messing this town up.” “it's already locked. we
train wrecked it, really good. train wreck traffic”. so clearly, mr. barber was
aware of the harm caused and was using the disruption and harm caused to
pressure governments.
there were also text
messages between cst. bach and barber where she communicates that locals and
businesses were worried about the demonstration impeding on their livelihoods.
the mischief caused
significant harm to ottawa residents and businesses, including economic losses,
emotional distress, and disruption of essential services.
the invocation of
municipal, provincial, and federal emergency measures, including the
emergencies
act
, underscores the severity of the impact.
counselling disobedience
of court order (barber)
mr. barber was convicted
of counselling others to disobey a court order. see exhibit no. 25 and 25(a) to
transcript of the “grab that horn” tiktok while the court accepts that he may
have misunderstood the scope of the injunction, and did consult a lawyer, the
act of publicly encouraging defiance of a judicial order remains an aggravating
factor.
aggravating regarding
barber
there were numerous texts
speaking about law enforcement where he said; “fucking with law enforcement’,
“playing games with the law”, “we are going to mess with this government”,
“playing cat and mouse with police” and his encouragement of telling truckers
to lock themselves on their trucks and blow the horn if police came to enforce.
although mr. barber did
work with cst. bach and city officials to reduce the number of trucks in the
downtown core. he also sent out messages on social media saying; “do you think
we're leaving? we might move a few trucks around just a little bit”, “so.
apparently, there were a few issues with the airport this morning.”, “i don't
know. you know, we've moved a few trucks out of the downtown core, and they
were kind of replaced somewhere else. that's so unfortunate you guys. my
goodness. be safe.” which causes one to question the sincerity of his
commitment to reduce the footprint and alleviate the stress on downtown
citizens and businesses.
aggravating regarding lich
ms lich showed her public
support for other unlawful demonstrations such as the windsor blockade by
stating; “i wish we could take credit for the windsor blockades, but we
cannot... we are keeping an eye out on the protests and blockades happening
nationwide and in so far as we are concerned it only strengthens our
demonstrators resolve” (exhibit no. 51 and exhibit 51(a)).
b. mitigating factors
lack of criminal record
neither ms. lich nor mr.
barber has a prior criminal record. they are both otherwise law abiding and pro
social individuals. they have strong support from friends and family and a
large number of like-minded supporters. they have been respectful to the court
and court staff throughout this trial.
they are first-time
offenders, which weighs significantly in favour of restraint.
peaceful intent and
messaging
both accused consistently
emphasized peaceful, non-violent and lawful protest in their public
communications. there is no evidence that either advocated violence, property
damage, or intimidation. they asked their followers to report anyone engaging
in such conduct to law enforcement their messaging included instructions to
cooperate with police and to report unlawful behaviour. they were viewed by
officials as the “broad moderate “group of the convoy.
efforts to mitigate harm
both ms. lich and mr.
barber showed a willingness to negotiate with the city and ottawa police to
alleviate some of the harm caused to the city by the presence of the freedom
convoy. they reached a good faith agreement to reduce the footprint of the
convoy and mr. barber met city officials to co-ordinate this move. as agreed by
kim ayotte, the plan stopped not because of mr. barber or any one from the
convoy but at the direction of the then chief of police.
mr. barber engaged with
police and city officials in efforts to reduce the footprint of the protest.
significantly, at the suggestion of cst, bach on february 8, he moved his own
truck (“big red”) out of the city to exit 88 and tried encouraging some others
to follow.
cooperation with
authorities
both accused cooperated
fully with police during their arrests. their conduct during enforcement
operations was non-confrontational and respectful.
collateral consequences
ms. lich served forty-nine
days which at 1.5 amounts to seventy-four days in jail some of which was during
covid so conditions would have been harsh with enhanced risk of contagion. mr.
barber was in custody for two days or amounting to three days at 1.5. both ms.
lich and mr. barber were subject to strict bail conditions for over three
years.
mr. barber incurred
substantial financial costs, had his bank accounts for a period frozen, and
both accused face ongoing civil litigation arising from the freedom convoy. mr.
barber along with his son, run a trucking business which includes international
haulage to the us. although mischief is not a crime of moral turpitude which
would generally make a person inadmissible to the us, a criminal conviction
could be an issue crossing the us border.
ms. lich’s husband lost
his job because of the charges, and her bank accounts were frozen for a
three-week period.
both have experienced
public vilification from some persons and personal hardship because of their
convictions. on the other hand, as shown in the sentencing materials, to many
of their supporters they are heroes.
community support and
positive impact
the court received
extensive letters of support for both accused, attesting to their character,
community involvement, and the perceived positive impact of their advocacy.
while not dispositive, these letters provide context for the offenders’
motivations and the broader societal response.
comparative moral
blameworthiness
in contrast to offenders
in cases such as
soranno
,
dube
, and
king
, neither lich nor
barber engaged in violent, destructive, or overtly defiant conduct.
their actions, while
unlawful, were not characterized by malice or disregard for human safety.
tamara lich
ms. lich is a first-time
offender. she has no prior criminal record. she is 52 years old, married and a
mother to three children and a grandmother to four. she has suffered
significant collateral consequences, including the equivalent of seventy-four
days in custody, strict bail conditions for over three years, loss of
employment, and reputational harm. she has also received hate mail and threats,
though she has maintained her commitment to peaceful civic engagement.
ms. lich stands convicted
as a principal and a party of mischief, arising from her continued
encouragement and incitement of protest activity after becoming aware of its
unlawful consequences. the court has found that her conduct was non-violent,
that she did not engage in direct obstruction or incitement, and that her
messaging consistently emphasized peaceful and lawful protest. her messaging,
including tiktok and other social media posts, consistently emphasized
peaceful protest and lawful
conduct. also, she did not plan or premeditate criminal conduct. this
distinguishes her case from precedent decisions involving deliberate unlawful
action.
the court accepts that ms.
lich did not personally engage in direct obstruction of roadways, nor did she
possess a vehicle in ottawa or participate in honking or other disruptive acts.
her role was primarily in communications and fundraising. nevertheless, her
status as a figurehead and president of the protest movement gave her messaging
significant influence and that cannot be understated.
the court accepts that ms.
lich made genuine efforts to mitigate the impact of the protest, including
responding positively to the mayor’s request to reduce the footprint and
participating in the relocation of vehicles. these efforts are somewhat
unprecedented in protest jurisprudence and reflect a reduced degree of moral
blameworthiness.
christopher barber
mr. barber is a first-time
offender with no prior criminal record. he has complied with all his strict
bail conditions, including a $100,000 bond, and has suffered substantial
collateral consequences, including the freezing of his bank accounts, loss of
income, and ongoing civil litigation. he has incurred over $40,000 in travel
expenses attending court and faces potential restrictions on his ability to
continue his cross-border trucking business.
mr. barber stands
convicted of mischief as a principal and a party and counselling others to
disobey a court order. the latter conviction reflects a serious disregard for
judicial authority and is an aggravating factor. however, the court has also found
that
mr. barber’s conduct
was non-violent, and that he did not incite aggression or intimidation.
mr. barber played a more
logistical and operational
role in the protest, including coordinating truck placement and communicating
with protestors. he attended meetings with city officials and made documented
efforts to attempt reduce the
protest footprint to alleviate the extent
of the harm to the city and its residents, including relocating his own truck
“big red” to exit 88.
the court accepts that mr.
barber sought legal advice, albeit imperfectly, and that his conduct was
motivated by civic engagement rather than malice or intent to harm. his moral
blameworthiness is reduced by his cooperation with police, his efforts to
relocate vehicles, and his peaceful conduct throughout the proceedings.
his messaging emphasized
peaceful protest, and he advised followers to cooperate with police. his
cooperation during arrest was complete and respectful.
the court finds that mr.
barber’s conduct was
not premeditated or planned with criminal intent. there is no
evidence he arrived with that intent. the protest evolved over time, and his
actions must be assessed in that context. this reduces his moral
blameworthiness, though the conviction for counselling disobedience of a court
order remains serious.
mr. barber has no prior
criminal record, complied with bail conditions, and has suffered significant
collateral consequences, including financial loss, reputational harm, and
ongoing civil litigation. he does not pose a danger to the community.
vii. judicial reasoning
and application to the cases of ms. lich and mr. barber
as i previously stated,
the parties could not be further apart when it comes to their respective
sentencing positions and with all due respect, i must reject the suggested
sentences of both the crown and the defence.
i accept as is stated in
all the protest cases provided to this court, that the primary sentencing
objectives must be denunciation and deterrence, both general and specific and
the sentence must reflect society’s condemnation of such conduct.
the accused committed a
serious form of mischief, which is contrary to the
criminal code
. it is
a crime. the accused actions had a significant detrimental effect on the
citizens of ottawa who wanted nothing other than to carry on living in their
community without having horns honking day and night, the roads impassable
blocked by noisy trucks emitting diesel fumes making it impossible at times to
even exit their own building and for other cars and buses to enter the downtown
core.
the sentence that this court
imposes on them must make clear that many canadians denounce their actions, and
it is hoped that the sentence will deter them and supporters from engaging in
unlawful conduct which challenges the rule of law.
the court must also
consider the personal circumstances of each accused and the aggravating and
mitigating factors the court has considered. in this given neither have
criminal records, the principles of restraint and rehabilitation also must play
a role in determining sentence.
at the sentencing hearing,
counsel for both accused submitted to this court that it should impose absolute
discharges as a fair and appropriate sentence. in my view to impose such a
sentence would be unfit. as noted in
r. v soranno
at para. 141; “a
review of the case authorities demonstrates that in serious cases of planned
and deliberate civil disobedience having significant consequences, generally,
discharges are not considered appropriate and are not granted in the absence of
strong evidence of remorse. the courts are overwhelmingly concerned with the
need for denunciation and general deterrence, and discharges are seen as
inconsistent with these pressing objectives.” while discharges might clearly be
in the accused best interests, in my view it would be contrary to the public
interest to impose a discharge and would send the entirely wrong message to the
public at large . a discharge would fail to reflect the need for deterrence and
denunciation and would undermine confidence in the administration of justice.
the court equally and with
respect rejects the sentence of eight years jail sought for mr. barber and
seven years jail sought for ms. lich. to impose such a sentence would in my
view, would also amount to an unfit sentence, it neither being fair, appropriate
or consistent with the principles of sentence. persons charged with serious
violent crimes such as robbery or aggravated assault and other cases involving
violence rarely receive sentences in that penitentiary range. in the
colenutt
case involving possession of a weapon at the coutts blockade, the court imposed
a conditional jail sentence of two years less one day and the mischief charge
was withdrawn. in the
olienick and carbert
case involving possession of
guns and ammunition near the coutts blockade in the context of a plan to
allegedly murder police the accused received six and half year sentences.
the crown relies on the
dube
decision to support its position. the
dube
case is distinguishable
on many grounds.
mr. dube
was convicted of planning a sophisticated and
vengeful attack on hydro transmission lines, an attack on very critical
infrastructure. his planned and deliberate actions caused 180,000 people to be
without power, in the middle of winter, affecting numerous communities and
leaving a hospital and police station without power. the court found nothing
mitigating in the commission of the offence and few mitigating factors for the
accused. he received a seven-year sentence.
the actions of the accused
in the case the case at bar on a sliding scale of seriousness and moral
culpability is not the worst case of mischief. they came with the noblest
intent and did not advocate for violence. they did not plan a violent or
vengeful attack on critical infrastructure. there were several groups of protestors
in ottawa at the freedom convoy and as noted in the trial decision, while ms.
lich and mr. barber had significant influence over many, they could not control
everyone’s actions, they were broad moderate group.
i agree and adopt the
words of justice hackland in the
king
sentencing decision at para. 31:
in the court’s opinion there
is a social harm to unduly elevating the sentencing goals of denunciation and
deterrence in the context of political protests, to result in punitive
sentences at the top of the sentencing range. the risk is that an overly severe
sentence of imprisonment in the context of legitimate constitutionally
protected activity can have the effect of creating a chill or a fear of
participation in political expression such as demonstrations or protests, for
fear that some persons may cross the line into conduct constituting mischief
with resultant severe sentences for all involved. the freedom convoy protest
was about expressing opposition held by some to perceived government overreach
in the form of covid 19 mandates and other vaccine issues, which continue to be
matters of legitimate public discourse and shifting opinions and policy
approaches. the freedom convoy was not an attack aimed at, for example,
promoting violence or intimidation of racial or religious minorities or other
vulnerable groups. rather, the freedom convoy began as a lawful
constitutionally protected form of protest that unfortunately grew out of
control and was allowed to go on and on and morphed into criminal activity (in
the form of mischief and related offences).
the sentencing decisions i
consider to be most relevant are the
king
decision as well as those
arising from the 2022 coutts border blockade in alberta, which involved similar
protest-related mischief offences. the coutts blockade significantly affected
critical infrastructure being a busy u.s. canada border crossing. in the case
it bar, the streets of downtown ottawa were blocked and there were honking
horns and diesel fumes.
mr. king
received a twelve-month
sentence, nine months of which had been previously served in custody and the
last three months was to be served as a conditional sentence followed by a year
probation conditional jail sentence. there is no evidence
mr. king
worked with police or authorities to reduce the footprint and
only told people to leave the city to regroup when arrest and enforcement was
imminent.
in
r. v. van huigenbos
,
the accused was convicted of mischief over $5,000 and sentenced to four months
in jail. the court felt a real jail sentence was necessary emphasizing the need
for denunciation and deterrence, noting the accused’s leadership role and the
impact of the blockade.
mr. van huigenbos
has helped police navigate
through the blockade of vehicles and the court found a four-month sentence sent
the needed message of deterrence and denunciation.
in contrast, in
r. v.
janzen
, the accused received a three month conditional sentence and 100
hours of community service. the court found that
janzen
had expressed
genuine remorse, did not pose a danger to the community, and had a lower
leadership profile. he also helped in negotiations with police and helped move
vehicles from the blockade.
in
r. v. van herk
,
the accused was sentenced to a ninety-day conditional sentence with community
service and probation. the court noted that
van herk
was not a leader
and had demonstrated rehabilitative potential.
these decisions confirm
that conditional sentences can be appropriate in protest-related mischief cases
where the offender’s conduct, while serious, does not involve violence,
weapons, or high moral culpability.
in the sentencing process
a court must consider whether a custodial sentence is warranted and having
determined that and if the proposed sentence is less than two years the court
should then determine whether a conditional sentence is consistent with the
purpose and principles of sentence.
under s. 742.1, where a
person is convicted of an offence, except an offence that is punishable by a
minimum term of imprisonment, and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment
of less than two years, and is satisfied that serving the sentence in the
community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
sections 718 to 718.2, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the
offender's behaviour in the community, order that the offender serve the
sentence in the community, subject to the offender's complying with the
conditions of a conditional sentence order made under section 742.3.
in
r v proulx
,
2000
scc 5
,
140 ccc (3d) 449
,
30 cr (5th) 1
, the leading case involving conditional
sentence orders (“cso”), the supreme court of canada said; "a conditional
sentence can achieve both punitive and restorative objectives." the court
discusses denunciation and deterrence, being the punitive aspects of a cso,
when it says: “incarceration will usually provide more denunciation than a
conditional sentence, as a conditional sentence is generally a more lenient
sentence than a jail term of equivalent duration. that said, a conditional
sentence can still provide a significant amount of denunciation. this is
particularly so when onerous conditions are imposed, and the duration of the
conditional sentence is extended beyond the duration of the jail sentence that
would ordinarily have been imposed in the circumstances.”
the supreme court of
canada in
r. v. proulx
,
clarified that a conditional sentence is a form
of incarceration and must reflect the seriousness of the offence. it is not a
lenient alternative to probation. the court emphasized that conditional
sentences must include meaningful restrictions on liberty and must not
undermine public confidence in the administration of justice.
in
proulx
, the
court held that conditional sentences are appropriate where the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence can be achieved without resorting to actual
imprisonment, provided the offender does not pose a risk to public safety and
the sentence includes punitive conditions.
as this court has
mentioned, and justice labrenz pointed out, the coutts border crossing blockade
had a significant detrimental effect on the community. slatter, ja specifically
pointed out
in
pawlowski
's
conviction appeal: "blockading a highway
is an inherently aggressive and potentially violent form of conduct, designed
to intimidate and impede the movement of third parties." however, as
criminal
code
s 742.1 says, this court must consider whether a cso "would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
sections 718 to 718.2."
in the circumstances of
this case, the gravity of the offence relates primarily to the harm caused to
the citizens and businesses of ottawa and the broader harm to the community at
large.
section 718
of the
criminal code
emphasises the need to protect society
and to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a peaceful and
safe society. allowing persons to take over downtown ottawa and blockade the
streets and disturb citizens for a period of three weeks to achieve their
political objectives is anathema to the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society. ms. lich and
mr. barber were among the leaders of the convoy they represent the broad
moderate group.
the court finds that although
the conduct of mr. barber and ms. lich was serious, neither mr. barber nor ms.
lich possessed weapons, incited violence, or planned the destruction of critical
infrastructure.
their conduct was
non-violent, and both made documented efforts to cooperate with police and
reduce the protest footprint. they have no prior criminal records, have
complied with strict bail conditions, and have each suffered significant
collateral consequences.
barber’s conviction for
counselling disobedience of a court order is aggravating and an offence which
is an affront to the administration of justice. however, he lacked legal
training, had not been at the injunction hearing, misunderstood the nature of
the inunction and relied on legal advice. the court finds that mr. barber’s
moral blameworthiness is reduced due to his efforts to comply and his
misunderstanding of the parameters of the injunction.
the principles of
sentencing require that the court balance denunciation and deterrence with rehabilitation
and restraint. considering the mitigating factors, the reduced moral
blameworthiness, and the absence of violence or property damage, the court
finds that while a custodial sentence is required for each accused but that the
objectives of sentencing can be met through a conditional sentence with
punitive conditions.
i find both accused have
been specifically deterred by their arrest, their incarceration, the court
process and the collateral consequences each suffered as a result of being
charged.
the court finds that the
principles of denunciation and deterrence can be met through conditional
sentences with punitive conditions, including house arrest, curfews, and
prohibitions on certain activity. they can make reparations to the community
through community service. these conditions reflect the seriousness of the
offences and ensure that the sentence is not perceived as lenient.
a conditional sentence is
available under
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code
, and the court is
satisfied that such a sentence would not endanger the safety of the community
and would be consistent with the principles of sentencing. neither accused has
a prior criminal record, they have complied with strict bail conditions for
over three years and have demonstrated rehabilitative potential. their
cooperation with police during arrest was complete and respectful. neither
accused pose a risk to the community should they serve their sentences conditionally.
i am not going to impose
any period of probation following the conditional sentence as sated
in
van
huigenbos
at para.
21
: “in the case at bar, it would be naive for the court
to believe that it can rehabilitate the offender in their way of thinking
regarding protesting covid mandates. that would be punishing them for their
ideologies.”
disposition
christopher barber is
sentenced to a conditional sentence of 18 months on the charge of mischief and
a concurrent conditional sentence of 3 months for the counselling to disobey
court order
to be served in the community under the following conditions.
as
noted in
proulx
a conditional jail sentence can be longer than a real jail
sentence to add elements of deterrence. thus, a total sentence of 18 months
served as a conditional sentence:
the statutory conditions apply
as set out in
criminal code
s 742.3, which are:
•
keep
the peace and be of good behaviour;
•
appear
before the court when required to do so by the court;
•
report
to a supervisor within two working days, or such longer period as the court
directs, after the making of the conditional sentence order, and thereafter,
when required by the supervisor and in the manner directed by the supervisor;
•
remain
within the jurisdiction of the court unless written permission to go outside
that jurisdiction is obtained from the court or the supervisor; and
•
notify
the court or the supervisor in advance of any change of name or address; and
•
promptly
notify the court or the supervisor of any change of employment or occupation.
in addition to those
statutory conditions:
•
you
shall report today and after that the order will be transferred to stewart
valley, saskatchewan for supervision;
•
you shall
remain within your residence or on the property of your residence for the first
12 months with the following exceptions:
o
medical
emergencies for yourself or any member of your immediate family;
o
while
travelling from ottawa to stewart valley, except for employment;
o
except
while travelling to and from and being at any legal, medical , or dental appointments
and religious services and any required court attendances.
•
once
per week for a period of up 5 hours to obtain the necessities of life or as set
out in conjunction with the css, with the prior written permission of the
conditional sentence supervisor, that written permission is to be carried with
you during those times, and other exceptions approved by his supervisor;
•
for the remaining
6 months you shall abide by a curfew by being in your place of residence or the
property of your place of residence between the hours of 10:00pm and 5am except
for employment except for medical emergencies for yourself or your immediate
family or with the approval of the css;
•
perform 100 hours
of community service at a rate and schedule as set out by the conditional
sentence supervisor.
ms. lich shall receive a
conditional sentence of 18 months less 74 days of pre-sentence custody so a
remaining conditional sentence 15. 5 months. as
noted in
proulx
a conditional
sentence can be longer than a real jail sentence in order to add elements of
deterrence.
in addition to the statutory
conditions:
•
you
will report today to a supervisor and after that at such times and place as
directed by the superior or anyone authorized to assist in your supervision.
this order will be transferred to medicine hat, alberta for supervision.
•
during
the first 12 months of the order you are under house arrest. you will be in
your residence or on the property of your residence at all times with the
following exceptions:
o
while
travelling from ottawa to medicine hat, alberta;
o
for medical
emergencies involving yourself or your immediate family;
o
for
the purposes of travelling to and from and while at employment;
o
legal,
medical or dental appointments or attending religious service;
o
once
per week for a period of up to 5 hours to attend to the necessities of life or
as set out in conjunction with the css, with the prior written approval of the
conditional sentence supervisor that approval to be carried with you during
those times.
•
for
the remaining 3.5 months you shall be under a curfew of 10:00pm to 5:00am
except for medical emergencies for yourself or any member of your immediate
family, employment, or with the approval of the conditional sentence supervisor;
•
you are to
perform 100 hours of community service hours at a rate and schedule set out in
conjunction with the css.
released:  october
7, 2025
signed:
justice heather e. perkins-mcvey