ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. laramy
, 2025 oncj 593
date: november 13, 2025
court file no.:  toronto
23-48107979
& 48107980
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
christopher laramy
before justice patrice
f. band
reasons for
judgment
released: november
13, 2025
mr.
m. tooke............................... counsel for the public prosecution
service of canada
ms.
n. simova ................................................................................... counsel
for mr. laramy
band j.:
i.
introduction
mr.
laramy stood trial before me on indictable charges of possession for the
purpose of trafficking in cocaine, mdma and crystal methamphetamine, and
mischief under. the toronto police learned of the matter when mr. laramy’s
landlord came to tell them that he thought mr. laramy was involved in the drug
trade. based on information and evidence that the landlord later provided,
coupled with their own investigation, toronto police obtained a warrant to
search mr. laramy’s unit. inside, they found a variety of illegal drugs as well
as related paraphernalia including digital scales, baggies and phenacetin, a
known cocaine “cutting” agent. they also came to believe that he had damaged a
security camera in the building, and he was arrested and charged accordingly.
mr.
laramy began renting a ground-floor unit in a building owned by mr. david
rygier in late 2022. by early 2023, the two men were on very bad terms. tenants
had complained to mr. rygier that there was a lot of traffic in and out of mr.
laramy’s unit, and that he was leaving the front door of the building unlocked
to allow people to enter at all hours of the night. mr. laramy had installed
his own locks on his door without first notifying mr. rygier. there were also
issues with non-payment of rent. mr. rygier suspected that he was engaged in drug
activity. he was also concerned about security. so, he bought three security
cameras. they were equipped with motion sensors and would email him and other
tenants when they were triggered. they also captured audio. he set up the first
one on the ground floor near mr. laramy’s unit. it had a view of the front door
of the building as well as the door to mr. laramy’s unit. someone destroyed
that camera, so mr. rygier set up another one, this time up the stairs above a
landing. it captured a partial view of the door to mr. laramy’s unit. mr.
laramy believed that the cameras were an illegal invasion of his privacy. so,
he walked up the stairs, pulled down the second camera and took it into his
unit. according to mr. rygier, the camera’s mounting that was affixed to the
wall was damaged as a result. he never saw the camera again.
a
couple of weeks later, on may 31, mr. rygier went to 14 division to report his
concerns. he spoke to an officer at the desk, who told him that his complaint
would be passed to the appropriate unit and that they would contact him if they
wanted to. about a week later, mr. rygier decided that he would enter mr.
laramy’s unit. he placed a notice of intent to enter dated june 7 in mr.
laramy’s mailbox (the notice). it notified mr. laramy that he would be entering
the unit on june 8 between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. for “inspection & renovation.”
mr.
rygier was unable to enter through the front door because he did not have the
key or combination to the latest lock that mr. laramy had installed. he was
also unable to enter through the fire exit door, as it had been bolted or
screwed shut from the inside. so, he decided to enter through the kitchen
window. once inside, he saw what looked like illegal drugs as well as scales
and other paraphernalia. he took pictures of what he saw. he also saw the
notice in the unit.
mr.
rygier returned to 14 division to speak to police again on june 8. there, he met
with an officer at the front desk, who told him that the information would be
given to the appropriate unit. later, a detective contacted mr. rygier and
asked him to come in for an interview. mr. rygier gave a videotaped statement
to two officers and provided them with the photographs he had taken in mr.
laramy’s unit. in the following days, officers confirmed that mr. laramy was
living at the building, and that he was associated with a car that was there.
they learned that he had a record that included trafficking in scheduled
substances. they also made some observations of mr. laramy meeting with
individuals that appeared to them to be consistent with drug trafficking. with
that, they sought and obtained a warrant to search mr. laramy’s unit.
inside,
they found quantities of what they believed to be scheduled substances and
related items in different parts of the unit. some were in a satchel, some were
in a backpack, some were in a dresser drawer, some were on the coffee table. they
were packaged in baggies of different sizes, some bearing designs like red lips
and black spades. they also found two digital scales and a small, old fashioned
style balance.
the
exhibits were processed and tested in the ordinary course. the substances and
quantities involved in this case are:
-
mdma:
18.81 g.
-
crystal
methamphetamine: 21.71 g.
-
cocaine:
2.49 g.
police
also found 6.31 g. of ketamine which, at the time, they believed to be crystal
methamphetamine. mr. laramy was not charged in relation to that substance.
a
police officer was qualified as an expert with respect to the distribution,
packaging, pricing,
modus operandi
and sale of the drugs in question at
the street level. in his opinion, the variety and quantity of drugs, viewed in
combination and along with other indicators including scales, baggies and a
cutting agent, was consistent with possession for the purpose of trafficking.
mr.
laramy testified in his own defence. he explained that he possessed the drugs
and associated paraphernalia only for his own personal use. he also said that
he felt entitled to remove the second camera because it was violating his right
to privacy. moreover, he did not break its mounting. i will discuss his
testimony in more detail below.
on
behalf of mr. laramy, ms. simova filed a
charter
application asking me
to quash the warrant and exclude the evidence found during the search. she
argued that mr. rygier violated the
residential tenancies act
(
rta
)
and that he did so as an agent of the state. in the alternative, she argued
that the police should have done more to satisfy themselves that what mr. rygier
had done was legal. by failing to do so, they demonstrated negligence amounting
to bad faith. what is more, their failure to do more encourages illegal
behaviour among citizens by condoning what mr. rygier did. even if the evidence
were to remain in the information to obtain (ito), the police conduct amounting
to bad faith calls upon this court to exercise its residual discretion to quash
the warrant, pursuant to
r. v. paryniuk
2017 onca 87
.
the
trial and the
charter
application proceeded in blended fashion.
as for the merits, ms. simova argued
that mr. laramy is not guilty of possessing the scheduled substances for the
purposes of trafficking. also, he is protected against conviction for damaging
the camera mount by the “colour of right” defence, pursuant to
s. 429(2)
of the
criminal code
.
ii.
the issues
the
parties agree that without the information and evidence that mr. rygier
provided to police, the ito in this case would not have met the reasonable
grounds requirement. they also agree that mr. rygier violated the
rta
,
at least in relation to his notice. the time range for entry was too broad and
the reason he stated for entry was not his actual goal. also, he entered the
unit 23 hours after depositing the notice, not 24. ms. simova added that a
landlord is not entitled to break into a unit because the tenant has changed
the locks. the
rta
prescribes other remedies in such instances.
based
on the arguments as refined during oral submissions, the issues before me in relation
to the
charter
are:
a.
whether
mr. rygier’s illegally obtained evidence and information should be excised from
the ito because as an agent of the state, he violated mr. laramy’s s. 8 rights;
b.
whether
it was negligent for the police to rely on mr. rygier’s information and
evidence without probing further into his compliance with the
rta
and,
if so, whether that negligence amounted to bad faith; and
c.
in
the alternative, whether i should exercise my residual discretion to quash the
warrant.
because
the search was judicially authorized, the burden on the
charter
application rests on mr. laramy.
if
the warrant stands, i must decide if the crown has proved beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. laramy possessed the drugs for the purpose of trafficking.
lastly,
and independently of the search, i must decide whether the crown has proved
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. laramy committed mischief by damaging the
camera’s mounting.
iii.
law and analysis
1.
the
charter
a.
whether
mr. rygier was acting as an agent of the state
ms.
simova’s argument on this point turns entirely on the fact that mr. rygier entered
mr. laramy’s unit after attending 14 division on may 31 and being told that
officers might call him. then, after entering the unit, he returned to 14
division to pursue the matter further.
as
it turns out, he met with the same desk officer on both days: pc marshall. ms.
simova argued that i should be suspicious of pc marshall’s testimony because it
appeared rehearsed and the notes she referred to were typed in the style of
will-says. pc marshall maintained that she had made her notes in a timely
fashion and that all she had done was relay information to the appropriate
officers.
in
cross-examination, mr. rygier denied that the police had directed him to do
anything on may 31. he wanted to investigate the matter. as for pc marshall,
ms. simova did not put to her the notion that she had directed mr. rygier,
implicitly or explicitly, to go search for evidence.
at
the time, mr. rygier was very frustrated with mr. laramy as a tenant. aside
from the issues with rent, the locks and security concerns, he thought mr.
laramy was a drug dealer. i believed him that the police did not direct him to
do anything. rather, he decided to take things into his own hands by entering
mr. laramy’s unit. i make this finding despite my concerns about his
credibility and reliability, because it is plainly apparent that he was
motivated to do so because he wanted mr. laramy out. i discuss those concerns
below.
pc
marshall’s evidence-in-chief proceeded without the usual qualification of her
notes. she seemed to have memorized them, which struck me as unusual. but in
the circumstances of this case, it would be a huge and unjustified leap to
conclude that she had implicitly or explicitly directed mr. rygier to conduct
an investigation, and that she had written up her notes after the fact to cover
it up.
i
find that mr. rygier acted for his own reasons and not at the instance of
police, either implicitly or explicitly. as such, he was not a police agent and
his actions cannot be attributed to them or constitute a breach of s. 8 of the
charter
:
see
r. v. wilkinson
2001 bcca 589
. therefore, the argument that his
information and photos ought to be excised from the ito fails.
b.
whether
the police negligently relied on mr. rygier’s evidence and information
during
his interview, mr. rygier told police that he had provided notice to mr. laramy
and that he had climbed into the unit through the window. they expressed
surprise that he had entered through the window. pc harding explained that this
was because of mr. rygier’s age. pc brown did not see red flags because the
locks had been changed and the fire exit door had been screwed shut. moreover, he
knew that 24 hours’ notice was required, and understood that mr. laramy had
received the notice. as pc brown explained, he believed mr. rygier, who had
sworn to tell the truth.
in
this case, i do not find that the police had an obligation to probe further
into mr. rygier’s compliance with the
rta
. they were satisfied that he
had given mr. laramy notice and that he did not have any other way to enter the
unit. while little turns on it, i am not persuaded by ms. simova’s argument
that mr. rygier removed the window. he testified that he removed the screen and
then slid the window open. in his statement to police, what he said about the
window was not clear. what i heard on the video was that he “made entry through
kitchen window … removed
the
ah
…” which is ambiguous at best. after
a certain amount of repetition, pc brown capitulated and agreed with ms. simova
that mr. rygier said he had removed “
it
.” i note that pc brown’s
recollection of details was poor, due to the passage of time. i do not accept
his evidence on that point.
i
do not find that the police were negligent. mr. rygier provided them with
photographs of what clearly looked like illegal drugs and related paraphernalia.
these amply corroborated his stated observations. they conducted their own
independent investigation in which they confirmed things about mr. laramy and
his connection to the unit. they also did some surveillance and saw him engaging
in what looked to them like hand-to-hand drug transactions.
i
find that the police did not breach mr. laramy’s s. 8 rights by relying on mr. rygier’s
information and evidence.
i
would add that these conclusions find support in the british columbia court of
appeal’s
decision in
wilkinson
,
supra
.
c.
whether
i should exercise my residual discretion to quash the warrant
courts
have a residual discretion to set aside an otherwise valid warrant “where
police conduct has subverted the pre-authorization process through deliberate
non-disclosure, bad faith, deliberate deception, fraudulent misrepresentation
or the like”:
paryniuk
,
supra
at paras.
69 & 72
. the standard
to be met is high; it may even be the “clearest of cases” standard where, as here,
what is claimed would gut the crown’s case to such an extent as to amount to a
stay of proceedings:
ibid
, at paras. 80-81.
if
i am wrong about my conclusions, and the police did missed the mark, it was not
by much. their conduct could not reasonably be described
as deliberate
non-disclosure, bad faith, deliberate deception, fraudulent misrepresentation
or the like
. assuming that a police officer who acts upon evidence that was
illegally obtained by a citizen could breach an accused person’s s. 8 rights
because doing so condones or encourages such conduct, i see no realistic
concern that the police in this case condoned mr. rygier’s actions or that they
have indirectly encouraged other citizens to break the law. put differently, i
do not see this as a case that calls upon the court to distance itself from the
actions of the police. their conduct in this case was not subversive of the
warrant process.
as
such, the claim that i should use my residual discretion to set aside the
warrant in this case is dismissed.
2.
the
case on the merits
a.
the
burden of proof
the crown bears the entire burden of
proving mr. laramy’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. that burden never shifts
to mr. laramy.
in
r. v. lifchus
,
1997 canlii 319 (scc)
,
3 scr 320
at
para.
36
, the supreme court of canada explained that reasonable doubt is not
based on sympathy or prejudice; rather, it is based on reason and common sense;
it is logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence; it does not
involve proof to an absolute certainty; it is not proof beyond any doubt nor is
it an imaginary or frivolous doubt; and more is required than proof that the
accused is probably guilty.
in most cases where an accused person
testifies or presents evidence, it is important to follow the analytical
framework that the supreme court of canada provided in
r. v. w.d.
(1991),
1991 canlii 93 (scc)
,
63 ccc (3d) 397
(s.c.c.)
to
ensure that the burden of proof does not shift. it is broken down into three
prongs:
(i)
if
i believe mr. laramy’s evidence and it is exculpatory, i must acquit him.
(ii)
if
i do not believe mr. laramy’s testimony but am left in reasonable doubt by it,
i must acquit him.
(iii)
even
if i am not left in doubt by mr. laramy’s evidence, i must ask whether, on the
basis of the evidence that i do accept, i am convinced beyond a reasonable
doubt by that evidence of his guilt.
i also remind myself that a criminal trial
is not a credibility contest as between the accused person and the complainant.
what is more, credibility and reliability are not all or nothing propositions;
a judge can accept some, all or none of what a witness says.
in
r. v. g.(m.)
(1994),
1994 canlii 8733 (on ca)
,
93 c.c.c.
(3d) 347
, at para.
23
, leave to appeal to s.c.c. refused, s.c.c.a. no.
390, the ontario court of appeal wrote that “[p]robably the most valuable means
of assessing the credibility of a crucial witness is to examine the consistency
between what the witness said in the witness box and what the witness has said
on other occasions, whether on oath or not.” the court went on to explain that
[i]nconsistencies
vary in their nature and importance. some are minor, others are not. some
concern material issues, others peripheral subjects. where an inconsistency
involves something material about which an honest witness is unlikely to be
mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a carelessness with the truth about
which the trier of fact should be concerned.
in
r. v. r.e.m.
2008 scc 51
, the
supreme court of canada discussed trial judges’ reasons regarding credibility
findings. at para. 49, the court explained:
while
it is useful for a judge to attempt to articulate the reasons for believing a
witness and disbelieving another in general or on a particular point, the fact
remains that the exercise may not be purely intellectual and may involve
factors that are difficult to verbalize.
furthermore, embellishing why a
particular witness’s evidence is rejected may involve the judge saying
unflattering things about the witness; judges may wish to spare the accused who
takes the stand to deny the crime, for example, the indignity of not only
rejecting his evidence and convicting him, but adding negative comments about
his demeanor.
in short, assessing credibility is a difficult and delicate
matter that does not always lend itself to precise and complete verbalization.
(my emphasis.)
b.
the
cdsa
and
criminal code
charges
the
police found the three scheduled substances at issue in different parts of mr.
laramy’s apartment, where he lives alone. a fourth substance tested as
ketamine. the drugs were packaged in different sized baggies, some bearing
designs. they also found three scales; two of them digital. in addition, they
found about 8 g. of phenacetin in a baggie. on top of the fridge, they found a
crystalline substance in a plastic food container.
the
expert witness, dc dickenson, was of the view that the combination of drugs and
the additional paraphernalia were consistent with possession for the purpose of
trafficking. he explained that street level dealers like to have a variety of
substances to serve their customers. he also explained that phenacetin is
commonly used to cut cocaine to increase the amount for sale and, therefore,
profit. he gave his testimony fairly and made reasonable concessions. for
instance, he readily acknowledged that the relatively small quantity of cocaine,
seen on its own, was consistent with personal use. he also limited himself to
what he knew about phenacetin. i accept his testimony. it was honest, credible,
and it accorded with common sense in view of the circumstances.
as
for the mischief charge, the hallway camera captured mr. laramy removing it and
taking it away.
as
a result, a lot turns on mr. laramy’s credibility. while he is in a committed relationship
now, mr. laramy lived alone in the unit which, as he explained, he liked to
keep neat. he is a truck driver and a part-time dj and event planner. when he
djs, it is late at night. he testified that he has been addicted to crystal
methamphetamine for 20 years. it helps him to think. he has recently learned
that he might have adhd. he also uses mdma and cocaine from time to time when
he djs. as a habitual drug user, he likes to buy in larger quantities. it is
less expensive and more convenient. he likes to weigh out his doses, and
package them accordingly. this explains why he possessed the drugs in the
amounts that he did. it also explains the scales and the quantity of different
sized baggies. as for the phenacetin, mr. laramy said that he got ripped off.
he thought he had bought 14 g. of cocaine on the street, but it turned out to be
8 g. of phenacetin. nonetheless, he kept it in a drawer. he does not know what the
crystalline substance in the container on top of his fridge is, but thinks it
is epsom salts.
as
for the camera, mr. laramy explained that he removed it carefully and did not
damage the mounting.
i
did not believe mr. laramy’s testimony. it was internally inconsistent and did
not accord with common sense. for instance, he testified that he intended to
give mr. rygier a key to the second lock and texted him about it. then, in
cross-examination, he agreed that there had been no such communication. he
testified that he intended to return the camera to mr. rygier but never got the
chance before the police searched his unit. that was over two weeks later. i do
not believe that mr. laramy, a long-time drug user who likes to weigh and
package his own doses, would walk away from a half-ounce cocaine purchase with
only 8 g. what is more, i do not believe that mr. laramy, who likes to keep his
apartment neat, would keep those 8 g. of phenacetin lying around for no reason.
similarly, it does not make sense that he would not know the nature of the
crystalline substance that was found on top of his fridge. nor does it make
sense that with his two decades of experience in the illegal drug trade, he would
choose to carry around his own doses in small tell-tale baggies in a backpack
or satchel together with a digital scale if it was exclusively for his own
personal use. of course, his 2021 convictions for use of a forged or falsified credit
card (s. 342(1)(c)(i)) and procuring an identity document that relates to
another person (s. 56.1(1)) added to my concerns.
i
reject mr. laramy’s evidence. viewed in the context of all the evidence, it
does not raise a reasonable doubt in my mind concerning the
cdsa
counts.
on the basis of the evidence that i do accept, which includes the combination
of drugs, the baggies, the scales and the expert testimony, i am convinced
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. laramy possessed the drugs for the purpose
of trafficking. this includes the cocaine, despite the relatively small amount.
i make this finding based on the expert evidence, the variety of drugs and, importantly,
the presence of phenacetin.
with
respect to the camera, mr. laramy explained that he felt entitled to remove it
because it was violating his right to privacy. typically, the colour of right
defence relates to a property interest:
r. v. demarco
,
o.j. no.
533
at para 8 (c.a.)
. in this case, mr. laramy had none. for the defence to
have an air of reality, mr. laramy would have to have had an honest belief that
he had a legal right to damage the camera, even if that belief was mistaken. a
moral belief is not enough: see
r. v. hemmerly
,
o.j. no. 143 (c.a.)
.
even if mr. laramy correctly believed that his privacy rights were being
violated, the defence has no air of reality. first, i did not believe mr.
laramy’s testimony. second, a belief that he could remove, damage and keep the
camera is so unreasonable that i do not accept that mr. laramy honestly held
it. if he held any belief that he could damage and remove the camera, it was no
more than a belief in a moral entitlement. that is not enough.
but
that does not settle the question. mr. rygier’s testimony was also problematic.
he was forgetful and inconsistent. his evidence about where he installed the
first camera was confused. his recall of the chronology of events – such as
when mr. laramy moved in, and when he attended the police station for his
interview – was also muddled. he told the police that mr. laramy broke the
first camera. at trial, he said he did not know who had done it. he also gave
different answers about where in the apartment he saw the notice. also, the
reason for entry that he wrote on the notice was not truthful.
ms.
simova submits that battery-powered cameras like the ones mr. rygier installed
are designed to be easily removed from their mounts. the mount was not
presented as evidence. there is only mr. rygier’s word. i am not convinced
beyond a reasonable doubt that it was damaged.
iv.
conclusion
for
these reasons, i find mr. laramy guilty of the
cdsa
counts, as amended,
but not guilty of the mischief count, which is particularized to allege damage.
released:
november 13, 2025
_____________________________________
justice patrice f. band