ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. khairkhahi
, 2025 oncj 467
date:
2025 08 29
court
file no.:  brockville 23-19100684
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
navid
khairkhahi
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on july 18, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on august 29, 2025
michael purcell................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
will murray........................................................................................ counsel
for the accused
richardson,
j.:
introduction
despite constant criticism, canada has one of
the best systems of criminal justice in the world.
the strength of our system depends on:
a)
judicial officers who are truly independent from the government or
any other external factor;
b)
crown counsel who argue passionately, act as quasi ministers of
justice and push cases to their legitimate strength;
c)
defence counsel who argue passionately and vigorously on behalf of
their clients;
d)
police officers who listen to both sides and exercise independent
judgment with respect to whether to initiate a criminal prosecution; and
e)
witnesses who make complaints to the police and testify in court
without fear.
all of these players are supported by a myriad
of others:  courts services, victim services, probation and parole, detention
centres, reformatories, mental health workers, diversion workers, corrections
canada and countless others.
all of these individuals are all included in the
definition of “justice system participant” in
section 2
of the
criminal code
.
when someone interferes with a justice system
participant, and attempts to bribe, influence, harass, extort, threaten, or
commit acts of violence towards them, it is a serious crime.
this crime is not merely committed against the
individual, but against the system and society as a whole.  such conduct
offends and undermines our system of justice and is rightly an affront to all
canadians who want to live in a free and democratic society.
as i will discuss, individuals who commit such
offences should expect to be treated severely and be sentenced to a period of
incarceration.  denunciation and deterrence are the primary sentencing
considerations.
in this case, mr. khairkhahi intimidated a
provincial prosecutor.
mr. khairkhahi also suffers from schizophrenia
and obsessive compulsive disorder (ocd) and related mental health issues.
the issues i must decide in this case are:
a)
the length of sentence that should be imposed upon mr. khairkhahi;
and
b)
whether his mental health issues are sufficient
to diminish his moral blame­worthiness so as to reduce his sentence and, in
particular, render a conditional sentence a fit sentence
.
facts
a detailed agreed statement of facts was filed
as exhibit 1.
on february 21, 2023, mr. khairkhahi was charged
with various offences under the
highway traffic act
which were alleged
to occurred in the township of elizabethtown.
on april 23, 2023, mr. khairkhahi emailed gm,
the prosecutor assigned to his case, to initiate negotiations toward
resolution.  mr. khairkhahi attached to this email a copy of his private
investigator’s licence.   he complained that the charging officer lied.  he
stated that the sooner the matter was settled, the better.  gm did not respond.
a copy of this email was filed as exhibit 5.
two days after he sent the email, gm was in the
provincial offences court.  mr. khairkhahi spoke to him.  he was adamant that
the charges be withdrawn or reduced.  gm told him that he could take the matter
to trial.
three days later (april 28, 2023), just after
1:00 am ,gm and his wife dtm received voice messages on their cell phones.  the
voice leaving the message said, “check your email”.
gm checked his email and saw an email, sent at
1:01 am, from mr. khairkhahi which stated as follows:
hello [gm]:
hope you and
your family are healthy and safe at [gm and dtm’s home address].
as a follow up
to my previous email, i am hoping you will be a reasonable man to consider a
fair and early resolution.  i am willing to accept a speeding charge and a
charitable donation to a local hospital in brockville.
please let me
know how you feel about it.
stay safe,
navid khairkhahi
gm and dtm contacted police.  they felt intimidated,
threatened and they feared for their safety.
although it remains unknown how exactly mr. khairkhahi
obtained gm and dtm’s home address, private investigators have access to
ministry of transportation records.
a transcript of gm’s statement to police was
transcribed and filed as exhibit 2.  in the statement gm states that he took
the email as a threat, because there was a reference to him and his family
being safe.  he wondered how mr. khairkhahi knew he had a family.  he stated
that he was fearful “because anything can happen”.  he stated that he could
“handle it” but he was not “happy with it.”
a transcript of dtm’s statement to police was
filed as exhibit 3.  she stated that in all the years that gm has been doing
prosecutions, he has never had someone contact him at home.  she opined that
mr. khairkhahi’s contact “in the middle of the night” was designed to
intimidate.  with respect to the issue of fear, she stated, “yes and no.”  she
stated that she did not know mr. khairkhahi so she did not know what he was
capable of.  she stated that, “we’re being more careful for sure.”  she added
later, “…it’s worrying in that we don’t know what he’s capable of.”
the crown did not file a victim impact statement
for either gm or dtm.
dr. ward’s report
defence counsel referred mr. khairkhahi to dr.
helen ward for an assessment.  a copy of that assessment dated july 2, 2024 was
filed on consent (exhibit 4, tab 3).  dr. ward is known to this court to have
the qualifications as a forensic psychiatrist.  the crown did not oppose her
expertise or the content of the report.  the report reveals as follows:
a)
mr. khairkhahi was born and raised in toronto.  he had a normal birth.
his parents separated when he was ten.  he lived with his mother and saw his
father, who moved to the united states, from time to time.
b)
mr. khairkhahi reported being the victim of sexual abuse when he was
eight by a family friend.  he did not disclose it.
c)
he said that he developed ocd at about the same time.
d)
he felt isolated and did not have a lot of friends in school.
e)
in grade 7, he got in trouble for theft.  he skipped school.
f)
he started smoking cannabis in grade 9.
g)
he graduated from high school in 2010.
h)
mr. khairkhahi’s father told dr. ward that mr. khairkhahi told him
that he could hear voices while they were on a trip together when he was
approximately 12.
i)
in grade 9, mr. khairkhahi told his father that
he had a chip in his head from a vaccination.  he also became paranoid that his
phone was causing radiation.  he told dr. ward that he wrapped a magnet around
his head to neutralize the chip.
j)
mr. khairkhahi’s father noted that when he was
in grades 10 through 12, mr. khairkhahi became very interested in politics and
spent up to six hours a day studying.  he drank large quantities of spring or
purified water but refused tap water.  he expressed the belief that tap water
was toxic and would go up to a week without showering.  he refused to eat food
that his mother prepared because he thought the pan she used was toxic.  he
followed a radio show hosted by a conspiracy theorist.
k)
mr. khairkhahi’s father reported that when mr. khairkhahi was 18, he
started spending hours by himself in a forest.  there was one occasion where
his mother reported him missing and he was found in the woods reading a book.
l)
mr. khairkhahi enrolled at the scarborough
campus of the university of toronto.  he reported a breakdown in his first
year.  he reported depression.  he went to see a therapist and his family
doctor.  he had difficulty focussing on his schoolwork.  he obsessed about
toxins in the environment.  he lost a lot of weight because he became focussed
on his diet.  he wore a balaclava to block radiation from his phone or
computers.
m)
he was assessed by dr. mcintosh when he was 18.  dr. mcintosh was
not sure whether mr. khairkhahi’s symptoms supported a diagnosis of
schizophrenia or ocd.  mr. khairkhahi refused medication.  dr. mcintosh
referred mr. khairkhahi to the first episode psychosis program at camh.  mr.
khairkhahi reported refusing the medication that they prescribed because it
made him crazy.
n)
after leaving university in 2013, mr. khairkhahi worked as a
security guard or a concierge.
o)
he returned to university in 2019, to study french literature.  he
was successful in completing his degree in 2023.  he has supported himself
through working as a limousine driver, working as a private investigator, and tutoring
and interpreting french.
p)
in 2021, mr. khairkhahi was involved in a car accident.  he suffered
minor physical injuries but became more anxious.
q)
there is a family history of anxiety disorder and a more remote
family history of schizophrenia.
r)
when dr. ward asked him about the
highway
traffic act
charges, he admitted that he or his friend deliberately crashed
the rental car.  they did not call police right away.
s)
when asked about the charges before the court, mr. khairkhahi
stated:
i)
that gm was “not wanting to resolve things,
staring me down in court, trying to intimidate me.  that day, i felt compelled
to put a scare in him, put him in his place.  that’s what started the trouble.
technically, i did not make any threats to him.  (they were) sarcastic
remarks.”
ii)
he perceived gm as a bully who was trying to
intimidate him to plead guilty.  he stated, “i felt like it was my ethical
obligation to hammer him.”
iii)
he acknowledged emailing gm.  he admitted to
wanting gm “to be scared” and “not to mess with me.”
iv)
he stated that he did not have any regrets about
the email.  “to be honest, i have no regret.   no sympathy for him.  no big
regrets – i could go to jail.  sometimes i feel obligated, no matter the consequences.”
he then went on a tangent about being fired from employment with cbc and
pursuing a human rights complaint.
v)
he told dr. ward, “feeling compelled to do
something seemingly outrageous is nothing new – just this time i got in
trouble.  once i have the compulsion, there is nothing stopping me.”
vi)
he now denies being focussed on various toxins.
t)
he reported “intrusive thoughts” which are
“sexual thoughts that he does not want”.  he copes by going into the forest and
using a herbal remedy.
u)
he continues to believe that “big pharma” is evil, vaccinations are
not safe and technology is being used against people.
v)
he does not like close relationships.  he prefers his own company.
w)
he wants everything that he does to be done perfectly.  he told dr.
ward he was often late with assignments because of his perfectionism.
x)
mr. khairkhahi’s father reported that mr. khairkhahi struggles to
understand other people’s opinions and he has difficulty accepting fault when
he is wrong.
y)
dr. ward diagnosed as follows:
i)
ocd.
ii)
aspects of obsessive compulsive personality
disorder (ocpd).  dr. ward explained that this is an “entirely separate” diagnosis
from ocd and describes  it as “a pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness,
perfectionism and mental and interpersonal control”.   she opined that mr. khairkhahi’s
“rigidity and stubbornness and his perfectionism in specific settings” pointed
to this diagnosis, but stopped short of making a complete or final diagnosis.
iii)
a “psychotic illness”, schizophrenia.  dr. ward
described mr. khairkhahi’s level of schizophrenia as “mild” and noted that it
has “never been treated”, likely because he has never met the criteria for
involuntary admission and treatment.
iv)
symptoms of schizoid personality disorder (spd).
dr. ward noted that mr. khairkhahi demonstrates “a pattern of detachment from
social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in
interpersonal settings”.  like the ocpc diagnosis, however, dr. ward stopped
short of making a complete and final diagnosis because he does not meet enough
criteria.
v)
dr. ward opined that mr. khairkhahi’s
victimization as a child “likely triggered” his ocd and “contributed to the
development” of ocpd and spd symptoms.
vi)
as a result of these mental health issues, dr.
ward opined that mr. khairkhahi is “alienated from society”, although he is not
antisocial.
vii)
she also opined that his response to gm “was a
result of his personality disorder-driven defensive behaviour and rigid
interpersonal style”.
viii)
dr. ward did not believe that mr. khairkhahi’s psychosis
played a role in the commission of the offence.  she opined, however, that “his
untreated psychosis has contributed to his sense of alienation and made it more
difficult for him to engage with or trust in other people.”  she did not
endorse an opinion that he was “not criminally responsible” within the meaning
of
section 16
of the
criminal code
.
ix)
dr. ward was careful to reinforce her opinion
that mr. khairkhahi does not have a history of antisocial behaviour and that he
was not a person with a grudge against society, women, law enforcement or
prosecutors.  she stated, “within his limitations, he is trying to be part of
society.  he is just doing it badly.”
x)
dr. ward recommended group therapy for anger
management and interpersonal effectiveness.  she did not recommend pharmacological
intervention.
flemingdon health records (dr.
mcintosh) – 2011-2012
as noted in dr. ward’s report, mr. khairkhahi
was previously seen by dr. mcintosh at the flemingdon health centre (toronto
east general hospital) in 2011-2012.  mr. murray filed copies of those records
(exhibit 4, tab 12).  those records reveal that:
a)
he was referred because of “bizarre behaviour”.
b)
he expressed concern that he had been implanted with a microchip.
he wore magnets to counteract the effects of this.
c)
he also expressed concern about radiation.
d)
he felt that his mother, who was part of the reason for his referral,
was exaggerating his condition.
e)
dr. mcintosh was unable to pin down whether mr. khairkhahi met the
criteria for ocd or schizophrenia.
f)
he recommended family therapy, prescription
medication (paxil, a well-known antidepressant).  he noted that mr. khairkhahi
declined prescription medication.
in a follow up note, dated january 2012, dr.
mcintosh noted:
a)
mr. khairkhahi did not take the anti-depressant medication but did
take quetiapine (an anti-psychotic medication, commonly referred to as seroquel)
at the lowest possible dose.
b)
mr. khairkhahi “continued to have unreasonable concerns about
contamination and environmental issues”.
c)
if mr. khairkhahi did not take the medication, he would need to be
referred to the “first episode psychosis program”.
august 2024 admission to camh
mr. khairkhahi was subject to a form 42 under
the
mental health act
on august 13, 2024 (exhibit 4, tab 10).
progress notes (exhibit 4, tab 10), reveal that:
a)
mr. khairkhahi was originally admitted on a form 1.
b)
mr. khairkhahi indicated that, “i threatened people”.  he was unable
to remember the nature of the charges before the court, other than he
threatened someone.
c)
mr. khairkhahi was wearing multiple winter coats (in august) out of
concern that he would be exposed to radiation.  he complained of being
overheated and having hot flashes.
d)
he stated that he had “intrusive thoughts” and he speaks in an
unknown language to combat those thoughts.  the thoughts include violence,
crashing cars, choking people and gross sexual thoughts.  he believed that
people were after him and he was under covert video surveillance.
e)
he declined medication because he knew he was going to calm down.
f)
he admitted to crashing a car by driving it into
a barricade two years previously.
g)
he believed vaccination would be used to control him.
h)
he complained that he is unable to sleep in his mother’s house, so
he goes to sleep in the forest.
i)
he did not agree with the past diagnosis of
schizophrenia.
j)
given that there were no longer “acute safety
concerns”, he was no longer certifiable.
k)
mr. khairkhahi was noted to be “marginally capable to refuse
treatment.”
l)
mr. khairkhahi was offered voluntary admission
to hospital, but he declined.
mr. murray filed additional copies of records
related to mr. khairkhahi’s admission to the camh on august 19, 2024 (exhibit
4, tab 7).  those records reveal as follows:
a)
he was referred to the emergency department of camh on the
recommendation of his family physician
on august 13-14 out of “concern for increasing intrusive symptoms, anger and
anxiety.”.  there he was given a provisional diagnosis of ocd.  prescription
medication was recommended but he declined.
b)
he reiterated beliefs in contamination of the water supply, worries about
pollution, and contamination of doorknobs.  he reported “intrusive thoughts of
a sexual nature” and impulsivity.
c)
he endorsed what the notes refer to as “odd beliefs” including persecutory
beliefs towards free masons and prime minister trudeau.
d)
dr. zhang, the resident in psychiatry who saw mr. khairkhahi once he
was admitted, explained to mr. khairkhahi that his intrusive thoughts and
anxieties were “of a psychotic nature.”
e)
dr. zhang suggested anti-psychotic medication and cognitive
behaviour therapy.
f)
mr. khairkhahi stated he did not want to take
medication but was interested in pursuing cbt.
g)
he also stated, in an apparent reference to dr. ward’s july report,
that he had been diagnosed previously with schizophrenia/psychosis and he did
not agree with that diagnosis.
h)
dr. zhang noted that “[patient] has limited insight”.
mr. murray suggested in his submissions that mr.
khairkhahi’s admission to camh was as a result of difficulty adjusting to dr.
ward’s diagnosis.  there is no evidence of this.
north york general hospital programs
mr. murray filed documentation, dated may 28,
2025, from the north york general hospital (exhibit 4, tab 2) which revealed
that:
a)
mr. khairkhahi completed a cognitive behaviour therapy group program
in anger management and a dialectical behavioural therapy program for
interpersonal effectiveness.
b)
during intake mr. khairkhahi indicated that he regretted threatening
gm and he regretted the impact that his actions had on gm and his family.
c)
the dialectical behavioural therapy program for interpersonal
effectiveness skills consisted of 16 on-line or in-person weekly sessions
lasting 40 minutes each.
d)
the cognitive behaviour therapy program for anger management
consisted of six group sessions lasting for 90 minutes each.  this program was
held virtually.
e)
mr. khairkhahi was described as “cooperative and motivated to learn
how to apply the skills he was acquiring.”
f)
mr. khairkhahi expressed interest in completing
a one-year canadian mental health association dialectical treatment program and
he was on the waiting list for that program.
other documents filed
mr. khairkhahi was employed as an interpreter in
french, farsi and french-farsi by cantalk commencing in june 2023.  it is
unknown whether he still maintains this employment (exhibit 4, tab 15).
mr. khairkhahi completed his honours bachelor of
arts at the university of toronto in november 2023 (exhibit 4, tab 13).
mr. khairkhahi completed the anger and lifestyle
intensive program between october 10 and december 12, 2023 offered by the
salvation army.  the program was an on-line program.  there were ten sessions
and 21 hours therapy (exhibit 4, tab 14).
mr. khairkhahi received a certificate of
accomplishment from humber college for completing language interpreter training
in april 2024 (exhibit 4, tab 4).
mr. khairkhahi received a certificate of
completion from the john howard society of toronto for completing an anger
management program on november 27, 2024 (exhibit 4, tab 5).
mr. khairkhahi obtained employment in 2024/2025
as an interpreter for farsi with “exacta”.  it is unknown whether this was
full-time or part-time work, or whether he is still so-employed (exhibit 4, tab
15).
mr. khairkhahi has obtained employment with
intellibridge academy as a teaching and academic mentor which is to be
effective as of september 2, 2025.  the contract filed guarantees mr. khairkhahi
with 30 hours a week of employment at the rate of $25.00 per hour as the
teaching rate and $17.20 an hour as the non-teaching rate (exhibit 4, tab 15).
mr. khairkhahi obtained similar employment with
intelligent international education ltd. in december 2024 at the rate of $23.00
an hour for teaching hours and $17.20 an hour for “learning support”.
defence submissions
defence
counsel argued that a conditional sentence of 12 months, followed by two years
of probation was the appropriate sentence for mr. khairkhahi.  he invited
the court to sentence mr. khairkhahi to a longer period of conditional sentence
if the court were of the view that this was warranted.
defence
counsel pointed out that mr. khairkhahi has entered a guilty plea and he does
not have a criminal record.  there have been no breaches since he was charged.
he has employment.
defence
counsel noted that the charges before the court have spurred mr. khairkhahi to
take huge steps towards his rehabilitation.  he pointed out that prior to dr.
ward’s report, very little was known about mr. khairkhahi’s mental health
situation.  as a result of dr. ward’s report, he has taken steps and is doing
much better.  he is therefore a good candidate for a conditional sentence and
probationary disposition.
i
note that i disagree with part of these submissions.  as can be quickly
garnered through a review of the documentation summarized above, mr.
khairkhahi’s mental health condition was first outlined by dr. mcintosh in
2011-2012.  mr. khairkhahi did not, however, accept it, nor did he accept some
of dr. mcintosh’s recommendations, particularly treatment with anti-depressant
medication. there was some compliance with the recommendation that he take
anti-psychotic medication, but only on the minimum dose, and it is unknown how
long that continued.
i
agree that the charges before the court, and in particular, the crown’s
position that mr. khairkhahi should be sentenced to a substantial period of
incarceration, have fueled the completion of significant therapeutic treatment.
as evidenced by the august 2024 admission to camh, however, mr. khairkhahi
still does not respect the opinion that he suffers from schizophrenia (now
hypothesized by one (dr. mcintosh) and formally diagnosed by two (dr. ward and
dr. zhang) psychiatrists), and he continues to refuse pharmacological treatment
for this disease.
crown submissions
in
delightfully succinct and to-the-point submissions, crown counsel argued that
the appropriate disposition was two years of custody, to be followed by probation.
the crown stated that, but for mr. khairkhahi’s mental health problems, the
crown would have sought two and a half years in custody.
the
crown cited the following aggravating factors:
a)
mr. khairkhahi
engaged in persistent goal-oriented behaviour.  this was not a situation where he
had a spontaneous threatening outburst in court or where he was overcome by
emotion.  his actions were calculated and deeply personal.  they required a degree
of planning.  he used several means to intimidate the victims, including email,
phone and regular mail.  the phone contact was directed to the victims’
professional and personal lines.  he engaged in a campaign, albeit a brief
one.
b)
mr. khairkhahi
engaged in threatening behaviour, not only toward gm, but also toward dtm and
members of gm’s and dtm’s family.  dtm and the family were not involved with mr.
khairkhahi yet he personalized the threats against them.   crown counsel argued
that targeting a justice system participant’s family and spouse is highly
aggravating, more offensive and extremely grave.  i agree.
c)
the impact on
the victims.  the crown pointed out that there was a call in the early hours of
the morning.  the tone of voice and the contents of the email caused them to
feel intimidated, threatened and fearful.  although they declined to provide a
victim impact statement, the court ought to find that mr. khairkhahi’s conduct
had a significant impact upon them.  crown counsel argued that although the
response of the victims was measured and “not over the top”, this was an
extraordinary and exceptional situation.  as i will point out below, i agree
with the crown’s submissions about victim impact.
the
crown cited the following mitigating factors:
a)
mr. khairkhahi
entered a guilty plea.  the crown noted, however, that the mitigating effect of
the guilty plea was somewhat offset by the fact that the charges were commenced
two years ago.
b)
mr. khairkhahi’s
mental health problems.  the crown acknowledged that there was a nexus between
mr. khairkhahi’s mental health problems and the offences before the court.  the
crown argued, however, that while mr. khairkhahi’s mental health issues colours
his conduct, it does not excuse it, does not fully explain it and should not be
given undue weight.
defence reply
in
reply, defence counsel addressed crown counsel’s submissions with respect to
victim impact, arguing that there was no evidence of victim impact.
with
respect to this argument, i was advised during the course of the submissions
that both gm and dtm are former police officers.  i find that they tried to
take what happened to them in their stride, but they contacted police and
reported it because they did not know mr. khairkhahi and did not know what he
was capable of.  i find that they reacted stoically.
just
because a victim reacts stoically and does not seek to file a victim impact
statement, does not mean that they have not suffered some impacts.  their fear
for their safety and concern is self-evident from the act of calling the
police.  the gravity of mr. khairkhahi’s crime is not diminished by the fact
that the victims opted not to file a victim impact statement.  filing one is
their right.  it is not an obligation, nor is it tantamount to an admission
that there are no impacts or trifling impacts.
r.
v. blackman,
2022 onsc 3649
, is another case of intimidation of a justice system
participant, where the victim, an undercover police officer, did not file a
victim impact statement.  justice spies noted at paragraph 12 and 13:
i have no evidence form the
undercover officer tk about how these offences impacted him, but i can draw
certain reasonable inferences.
i do not know to what degree tk
actually feared for his personal safety after these threats were made, but
again i can infer that he must have at least to some degree been concerned for
his safety.  he had been outed as an undercover officer in the context of the
arrest of many individuals involved in very serious offences.  it would only be
natural that he would have some additional concern above and beyond the fear an
officer has in what can be a dangerous job.  as i said in my judgment at para.
130,
the only reasonable inference to draw from all these circumstances, is
that mr. blackman at least would have foreseen that his posts in the two images
would provoke a state of fear in tk that he might be harmed and that this might
impede his willingness to testify against mr. blackman
. [emphasis mine]
i
find similarly here with respect to mr. khairkhahi.  he foresaw that his
communications toward gm and dtm would provoke a state of fear in them, which
might impede gm’s willingness to prosecute him, or might force gm to
capitulate.
mr. khairkhahi’s allocution
when
i asked mr. khairkhahi if there was anything he would like to say before i
sentenced him, he advised that:
a)
he had an idea
in his mind of what should happen in his provincial offences matter.
b)
he felt that gm
was “rude and dismissive” of his point of view.
c)
he felt that gm
had a “bully personality”.
d)
he felt that it
was his “duty” to put gm in his place.
e)
after reviewing
his course of action, he realized that he was wrong to make that assumption.
f)
he now recognizes
that gm was doing his job as best he could.
g)
he is sorry for
being inconsiderate.
h)
he is trying to
have “good thoughts” in his mind and follow the golden rule.
i
note that mr. khairkhahi’s mother, father and sister were in court with him when
he entered his plea and when the sentencing was argued.  i acknowledge that
they have done their best to try to ensure that he gets help for his mental illness,
and i am sure that his plight has left them at their wit’s end.
analysis
sentencing
provisions in the
criminal code
section 423.1 states:
423.1
(1)
no
person shall, without lawful authority, engage in any conduct with the intent
to provoke a state of fear in
(a)
a group of persons or the general
public in order to impede the administration of criminal justice;
(b)
a justice system participant or military
justice system participant in order to impede him or her in the performance of
his or her duties; or
(c)
a journalist in order to impede him or
her in the transmission to the public of information in relation to a criminal
organization.
(3)
every person who contravenes this section is guilty of an
indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than
fourteen years.
“justice system participant” is defined in
section 2
of the
criminal code
:
justice
system participant
means
(a)
a
member of the senate, of the house of commons, of a legislative assembly or of
a municipal council,
(b)
a
person who plays a role in the administration of criminal justice, including
(i)
the
minister of public safety and emergency preparedness and a minister responsible
for policing in a province,
(ii)
a
prosecutor, a lawyer, a member of the chambre des notaires du québec and an
officer of a court,
(iii)
a
judge and a justice,
(iv)
a
juror and a person who is summoned as a juror,
(v)
an
informant, a prospective witness, a witness under subpoena and a witness who
has testified,
(vi)
a
peace officer within the meaning of any of paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e) and
(g) of the definition
peace officer
,
(vii)
a
civilian employee of a police force,
(viii)
a
person employed in the administration of a court,
(viii.1)
a
public officer within the meaning of subsection 25.1(1) and a person acting at
the direction of such an officer,
(ix)
an
employee of the canada revenue agency who is involved in the investigation of
an offence under an act of parliament,
(ix.1)
an
employee of the canada border services agency who is involved in the
investigation of an offence under an act of parliament,
(x)
an
employee of a federal or provincial correctional service, a parole supervisor
and any other person who is involved in the administration of a sentence under
the supervision of such a correctional service and a person who conducts
disciplinary hearings under the
corrections and
conditional release act
, and
(xi)
an
employee and a member of the parole board of canada and of a provincial parole
board, and
(c)
a
person who plays a role in respect of proceedings involving
(i)
security
information,
(ii)
criminal
intelligence information,
(iii)
information
that would endanger the safety of any person if it were disclosed,
(iv)
information
that is obtained in confidence from a source in canada, the government of a
foreign state, an international organization of states or an institution of
such a government or international organization, or
(v)
potentially
injurious information or sensitive information as those terms are defined in
section 38 of the
canada evidence act
;
sections 718
,
718.02
,
718.1
and
718.2
of the
criminal
code
state:
718
the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to denounce
unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is
caused by unlawful conduct;
(b)
to deter the
offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c)
to separate
offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide
reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to
victims or to the community.
718.02
when a court
imposes a sentence for an offence under subsection 270(1), section 270.01 or
270.02 or paragraph 423.1(1)(b), the court shall give primary consideration to
the objectives of denunciation and deterrence of the conduct that forms the
basis of the offence.
718.1
a sentence must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender.
718.2
a court that
imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following principles:
(a)
a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing,
….
(b)
a sentence
should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances;
….
(d)
an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available
sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances
and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be
considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of
aboriginal offenders.
i note that parliament has mandated that intimidation
of a justice system participant is a very serious crime.  it is punishable by
up to 14 years of imprisonment.  it is a strictly indictable offence.  an
accused charged with this offence has the right to elect his or her mode of
trial and the right to request a preliminary inquiry.
pursuant to
section 718.02
, i am also
statutorily required to give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence.
caselaw
with respect to intimidation of a justice system participant
i have not summarized the fulsome submissions
that both counsel made with respect to the caselaw.  the crown filed one volume
of cases and defence counsel filed three.  i am grateful to them for the
thoroughness of their research.
in
r. v. blackman
, supra
, the offender
was charged with intimidating a justice system participant and uttering a
threat to cause death or bodily harm.  the victim was an undercover police
officer involved in an investigation with respect to whether the offender was
trafficking in firearms.
just before the officer was about to give
evidence in a preliminary inquiry, the offender posted an image of the officer
on his instagram account.  he made comments that he and his shooters were
coming for the officer.  the crown sought two and a half years.  defence sought
two years plus one day.
the offender was 44.  he had two children.  he
had a very deprived childhood.  he was employed as a barber.  he was ultimately
acquitted on the weapons charges.  the allegations were out of character.  he
did not feel he should be punished for making a mistake.  he had no criminal
record.  specific deterrence was not a concern.
citing
r. v. hopwood,
and
r. v.
williams,
both
referred to in more detail
infra,
justice
spies sentenced the accused to two and a half years.  she noted that the
offender did not make a “spur of the moment decision” to intimidate the
officer.
in
r. v. lilly,
2023 nsca 80
, the
offender was convicted of intimidating a justice system participant.  the
victim, a correctional officer, was a witness against the accused in a matter
which involved an attack on another inmate.  during another shift, the accused
told the victim “don’t testify” and “stop snitching”.  he announced this in the
custodial environment where the victim worked so that it could be heard by
other inmates.
the trial judge sentenced the accused to 25
months imprisonment.  the nova scotia court of appeal dismissed the appeal,
noting:
a)
denunciation and deterrence were the primary sentencing objectives.
b)
section 423.1 protects individuals who work in the justice system
and are vulnerable to attack.
c)
deterrence and denunciation of conduct by inmates that could
adversely affect correctional officers is necessary to maintain order within
correctional institutions.
d)
intimidation of a justice system participant is dangerous for the
justice system.  the community may lose confidence if criminal charges are not
decided on their merits but are resolved because witnesses will not testify.
e)
the offender was not motivated to engage in rehabilitation-oriented
endeavours.
f)
the words that the offender spoke were overheard
by others, both guards and inmates in the institution.
g)
the victim suffered significant and ongoing levels of fear and
anxiety.
in
r. v. crossley,
2023 onsc 7018
, the offender
was convicted of two counts of intimidation of a justice system participant,
uttering a threat (against a judge), uttering a threat to a probation officer
to destroy a buddha statue, and two counts of criminally harassing the
detective who investigated him.
the offender sent an email to a judge, who was
the trial judge on mischief charges he was facing, indicating that he has
issued “the command for god to slay her majesty”.
he followed this up with a letter to the judge’s
chambers, referring to the fact that the trial judge found him guilty when he
should have been acquitted.  the letter went on to indicate that he had issued
a command for god to slay her majesty, and that it is in the interest of her
majesty to have the command to be reversed before it is too late.  he urged the
judge to take “urgent action” and declare a mistrial.  he stated that, “if her
neck is as stiff and obstinate as pharoah’s neck was in the days of moses then
we will surely be saying goodbye to her majesty soon and/or some/many of her
servants.”.
the emails to the detective were of a similar
ilk.  in one email, the offender wrote, because of your direct participation in
my prosecution, i fear for your safety and for the safety of those you love.  i
suspect god will strike those involved with my prosecution first.”  later in
the email, he went on, “please consider this matter diligently.  who likes
carnage?  not me.”
he proceeded to trial and was found guilty by a
jury.  a pre-sentence report and a section 21 report was prepared to assist in
sentencing.  the report revealed that:
a)
the offender had a history of schizophrenia.
b)
the offender did not adhere to prescribed medication.
c)
the offender had a history of threats of harm toward individuals in
government and property.
d)
the offender has “views of a religious nature that indicate some
degree of intolerance to other sentiments and beliefs.”
e)
the offender felt that he was morally justified for his intended
actions and beliefs.
f)
his schizophrenia and ongoing beliefs “raise
concerns that there are delusional ideas at play”.
g)
st. lawrence valley correctional centre would be an appropriate
placement if he received a carceral sentence.
the judge, who was the victim, did not file a victim
impact statement.
the crown sought two and a half years in the
penitentiary.
amicus
for the offender argued for a conditional sentence
followed by a three-year probation order.
justice parfett sentenced the accused to two
years and three months incarceration, and three years probation having regard
to the following factors:
a)
the offences committed by the offender were serious and deserved a
denunciatory sentence.
b)
section 423.1 protects individuals who work in the justice system
and are vulnerable to attack.  such offences ordinarily attract a penitentiary
term of imprisonment.
c)
the offender committed six offences over a span of 45 days.
d)
there were three victims.
e)
the offender had a criminal record.
f)
the offender engaged in persistent goal-oriented
behaviour.
g)
there was no proven nexus and no formal diagnosis of the offender’s
mental illness.  his illness could be taken into account in assessing sentence,
but they did not go so far as to reduce his sentence on compassionate grounds
(citing
r. v. prioriello, infra).
h)
there was no evidence that a lengthy sentence would have a severe
negative effect on the offender (also citing
r. v. prioriello
,
infra
).
in
r. v. mruk,
2025 bcpc 33
, the offender
was found guilty of one count of intimidating a justice system participant
after a trial.  the offender sent the victim, who was to testify with respect
to an incident involving one of his friends, a text message in which the victim
was admonished to “keep your word n show up for court” and “…the law needs you
to tell them you lied!!!!  it is all for the best and everyone involved
especially you!!”.  after receiving the message, the victim asked the offender
to call her, ostensibly because she did not recognise the number that the
message emanated from.  when he called her, the offender reiterated the
contents of the text message and told the victim that he knew where she lived.
the crown sought nine to twelve months.  the
defence sought six months.  the offender was 47.  he grew up in a difficult
home.  he previously worked as a long-haul truck driver but had been on social
assistance for seven years.  he is an alcoholic.  he had a dated criminal
record, which included offences of uttering threats and public mischief.
there was evidence that after the threat the
victim isolated herself, changed her routine, changed her clothing and her
hairstyle.  the court described the offence as pre-meditated and “not a spur of
the moment event.”  he suffered from poor health, including stroke, blood clots
and the loss of his toes.  he was a caregiver for his elderly mother.   after
citing a number of cases, justice tam found that:
a)
the range of sentence is between nine months and two and a half
years.
b)
deterrence and denunciation are the dominant principles.
c)
the victim is not just the person who received the threat, it is the
justice system as a whole, which is a fundamental aspect of a free and democratic
society.
d)
15 months was the appropriate sentence.  but for the accused’s
health problems and the fact that he was the caregiver for his mother, the
appropriate sentence would have been 18 months.
in one case cited by defence counsel,
r. v.
sorbara,
2017 bcpc 77
, the offender, who had a lengthy record, received a
75 day sentence for threatening to find the home of the judge he appeared
before and burning it down.  in
r. v. redgun,
2016 abpc 236
, an indigenous
offender who threatened a witness in a prosecution against her daughter, received
a suspended sentence and two years probation.
in my view,
sorbara
and
redgun
are
far outside the bounds of what is appropriate for this offence and i will not
follow them.  they do not pay sufficient heed to the importance of denunciation
and deterrence.
defence counsel suggested that intimidation of a
witness is more serious and should be dealt with more harshly than intimidation
of other justice system participants.   he filed
r. v. michel,
2010
nwttc 9
to support that view.
in that case justice schmaltz found at
paragraphs 16 and 17:
‘justice
system participant’ is broadly defined in the
criminal code
to include
many groups, witnesses, and prospective witnesses being one of those groups.
many of the groups of participants that this section applies to, e.g.
prosecutors, lawyers, officers of the court, even judges, play a role in the
justice system, but their roles in not confined to a specific case.  if the
intimidation of a member of one of these groups is successful, there is likely
another member of the group that can step in and the process will continue –
there will always be another prosecutor, another lawyer, another judge, another
court officer.  intimidation of any of them while still a serious crime will
not necessarily frustrate a prosecution.
but if an
accused successfully intimidates
a witness,
the result can be that the
prosecution of that accused will be frustrated.  intimidation of a witness can
result in significant damage to the administration of justice.  when a matter
is set for trial and a witness does not attend, or does attend but refuses to
testify, or recants on a previous statement, and the prosecution is terminated,
the community may well lose respect for and confidence in the criminal justice
system.  if the process is frustrated, a criminal charge will not be resolved
on its merits.  when an accused attempts to influence a witness to achieve such
a result, there has to be meaningful consequences that will deter both the
accused and others from such tactics and will express the court’s and the
community’s condemnation of this conduct.
this was the only case provided to me that makes
this distinction.  i do not agree with it.  if parliament had intended to
single out witnesses and prospective witnesses as a special category of
“justice system participant”, the intimidation of whom would be deserving of a
greater degree of punishment, it would have said so.  it did not.  the fact
that, for anyone other than witnesses, “another” justice system participant can
easily replace them, ignores the significant harm that can be caused by those
who commit those offences against their victims and the system as a whole.
caselaw
with respect to obstruction of justice
as i have pointed out, the following principles
set out in cases dealing with sentencing for obstruction of justice have been
considered and relied on in cases of intimidating a justice system participant:
a)
“…[o]bstruction of justice goes to the very heart and foundation of
our criminal justice system:
r. v. williams,
2016 onca 937
at paragraph
13
.
b)
asking a witness to lie in court should normally attract a
penitentiary term.  in a case where the offender sent a co-accused a note
asking the co-accused to lie, the appropriate sentence is two and a half
years:
r. v. hopwood,
2020 onca 608
.
caselaw with respect to mental illness as a mitigating factor on
sentence
as society and the court has gained a great
understanding of the role played by mental health problems in criminal
behaviour, mental health problems are increasingly recognised as a mitigating
factor on sentence.
in
crossley
,
justice parfett cited the following
two-step process set out in the court of appeal’s decision in
r. v.
prioriello,
2012 onca 63
at paragraphs
11 and 12
for determining the nature
and extent to which mental illness is a mitigating factor:
a)
first, the offender must show a causal link
between his illness and his criminal conduct.
b)
second, there must also be evidence that a
lengthy sentence would have a severe negative effect on the offender such that
it should be reduced on compassionate grounds.
defence counsel argued strenuously that
prioriello
must be read in the light cast by the court of appeal’s decision in
r.
v. fabbro,
2021 onca 494
, the supreme court of canada’s decision in
r.
v. hilbach,
2023 scc 3
and the court of appeal’s decisions in
r. v.
batisse,
2009 onca 114
,
r. v. ellis,
2013 onca 739
,
r. v.
husbands,
2024 onca 155
and
r. v. lojovic,
2025 onca 319
.  in making
this argument, defence counsel was essentially arguing that justice parfett’s
focus on denunciation and deterrence in
crossley
reached too far.
fabbro
involved
the case of an offender who suffered from mental health problems and addiction and
who was found guilty of possession of an unloaded sawed-off shotgun with nearby
ammunition.  his possession was for the purpose of committing suicide.  he barricaded
himself in his vehicle with the firearm in his mouth.  the ensuing stand-off with
police lasted several hours before the offender threw the gun out the window.  he
was admitted to hospital under the
mental health act
.  after release, he
completed residential treatment, participated in the methadone program and sought
help from a psychiatrist.  he was charged with a number of offences arising
from his possession of the weapon, pleaded guilty and sentenced to two years
less a day in reformatory, followed by three years probation.  the trial judge
found that denunciation and deterrence were the primary sentencing
considerations.  the offender appealed his sentence.
the court of appeal found that the sentencing
judge erred by placing undue emphasis on denunciation and deterrence and failing
to consider the causal link between the offender’s mental health and his
criminal conduct.  the court found that denunciation and deterrence was attenuated
by the fact that the accused intended to commit suicide, not harm other members
of the public.
the court of appeal also found that a sentencing
court must “….determine the extent to which [addictions and mental health]
contributed to the appellant’s conduct and the impact of that finding on the
appropriate sentence” (at paragraph 26).  in this case, there was “ample
evidence” and the “virtually inescapable” conclusion that there was a causal
link between the mental health issues and the criminal conduct, as evidenced
from the mental health documentation filed, his conduct on bail while being
treated, the fact that he abided by his bail conditions without a breach.
the court of appeal also noted at paragraph 27:
even if
denunciation and deterrence were the overriding objectives in this case, a
sentence of imprisonment was not the only route to achieve them.  a conditional
sentence recognizes the seriousness of the offences while at the same time
acknowledging and promoting the significant strides in rehabilitation that the
appellant has made with the help of his family and the medical community.
imposing a custodial sentence was likely to have a serious negative effect on
the appellant’s progress and would not serve the genuine societal interest.
in
hilbach
,
the supreme court grappled
with the constitutionality of the minimum mandatory sentence formerly in place
for cases of robbery with a firearm.  both the majority and the minority
indicated that mental health problems were a mitigating factor on sentence.
neither judgment spent a great deal of time focussing on this issue.
however,
hilbach
was cited with approval
by the ontario court of appeal in
husbands
.
in
husbands
, the
offender received a life sentence for the offence of manslaughter.  on appeal,
the court of appeal essentially found, citing
hilbach
,
and
r. v.
morris,
2021 onca 680
, that the two-step process in
prioriello
was
no longer applicable and the sole question to be decided was whether the
offender’s mental health issues were linked to the commission of the offence so
that they may serve a mitigating role in sentencing.
as defence counsel pointed out, the court of
appeal has averted to similar logic in other cases, including the recent case
of
lojovic
,
a case involving a motor vehicle fatality.
i note, parenthetically, that it is long
established that the role of deterrence and denunciation is of particular
import in such cases.
in
lojovic
,
the court found that the
trial judge was in error for failing to consider the “central role” played by
the offender’s mental health issues in the commission of the offence, whether
the mental health issues reduced his moral blameworthiness and rendered
denunciation and deterrence less important.  a ten-year sentence was reduced to
an eight-year sentence.
the mitigating factors
i find the following factors are mitigating:
a)
mr. khairkhahi does not have a criminal record.
b)
mr. khairkhahi entered a guilty plea.  i find, however, that this is
a case which the crown would have had little difficulty proving if mr.
khairkhahi had opted to proceed to trial.  nonetheless, his guilty plea spared
gm and dtm from testifying and it spared the significant time that proceeding
to a trial, and a preliminary inquiry may have squandered.  in these days of
significant backlogs and overburdened courts, he is entitled to credit for
this.
c)
in his allocution, mr. khairkhahi expressed remorse for his crime.  i
agree that dr. ward’s report indicated that he was not remorseful and not
possessing of significant insight with respect to the wrongfulness of his
conduct and the potential effects on dtm and gm. i accept, however, that the course
of treatment he has engaged in since dr. ward completed her report has helped
mr. khairkhahi to see the error of his ways.  he certainly now advertises that
he does.
whether he
will be able to ultimately deliver is another matter.  i note that i continue
to doubt whether mr. khairkhahi truly accepts the diagnoses that have been made
and he also continues to refuse pharmacological treatment.  unless he qualifies
for involuntary committal under the mental health legislation, he has the right
to control what goes into his body.  i cannot force him to take it.  i also
find that the nature of his disease and his distrust of government and
authority is what keeps him from accepting the diagnosis and taking his
medication.
d)
the evidence in this case firmly establishes that the accused’s
untreated schizophrenia, ocd and related aspects or symptoms of those disorders
was a material factor leading to the commission of the offence.  thus, he
qualifies for a finding that he possesses diminished moral blameworthiness for
the offence.  there is a causal link between his mental illnesses and the
offence.  it mitigates the sentence that he should receive.  i will discuss
this in greater detail below.
e)
mr. khairkhahi has completed significant counselling, including
cognitive behavioural therapy and dialectical behavioural therapy suggested by
dr. ward.  he clearly has access to mental health services.  he also appears to
have a dedicated and alert family physician, who helped ensure that he was
admitted to camh when he was in crisis in august 2024.
in an era
where over one million ontarians are without a family doctor and many who
suffer from mental health conditions do not have access to mental health
treatment and support, mr. khairkhahi is very lucky.  he should listen to and
follow the advice of his health care providers.
f)
there has been no allegation that he has
breached his bail conditions or committed another offence.
g)
there is evidence that mr. khairkhahi has managed to garner gainful
employment.
h)
mr. khairkhahi has significant family support from his mother and
father and his sister.  he should listen to them more often and follow their
advice.  they have demonstrated through the intervention with the family
doctor, which resulted in the emergency admission to camh last august, that
they will not hesitate to try to intervene to ensure that he is treated.
the aggravating factors
i agree with the aggravating factors set out by
the crown including:
a)
this was a pre-meditated offence.  somehow, mr. khairkhahi found gm
and dtm’s home address.  he also called their mobile phones and gm’s work
telephone in the middle of the night to ensure that they received the email
that was designed to intimidate them.  this is not a “spur of the moment”
offence or an offence committed in the heat of a moment of anger.
b)
as i have set out above, i agree that although the victims have
responded professionally and stoically to what happened to them, there has no
doubt been some trauma and worry on their part as a result of mr. khairkhahi’s
crime.
the appropriate sentence
before allowance for the mitigating effect of
mr. khairkhahi’s mental health problems, i find that the appropriate sentence
for his crime is 18 months imprisonment and three years probation.
as i noted, there are cases where the court has
imposed higher sentences.  many of those cases involve individuals with
criminal records, cases where the offenders were not entitled to the mitigation
that comes with a guilty plea, or cases where there was more than one victim.
that is why i have settled on 18 months as the appropriate sentence.
the issue then is what mitigation should mr.
khairkhahi be entitled to because of his mental health problems?  is he
entitled to further reduction of a carceral sentence, or, as sought by defence
counsel, should he be sentenced to a conditional sentence?
i am of the view that a conditional sentence is
the right course of action for this offender and this offence.  i state this
for the following reasons:
a)
mr. khairkhahi has taken great strides towards his rehabilitation by
completing counselling.  he still has more work to do, and i would have much
more confidence if he was taking his prescribed medication and more accepting
of the diagnoses, but i find that to sentence mr. khairkhahi to a period of
incarceration would be sending him the wrong message and would work to
counteract the efforts he has made toward his rehabilitation. because of these
efforts, a sentence that unduly focusses on denunciation and deterrence is
wrong-headed because those sentencing principles have been somewhat attenuated.
b)
as the supreme court of canada found in
r. v. proulx,
2000
scc 5
, and as discussed by the court of appeal in
fabbro
,
a conditional
sentence of imprisonment can achieve denunciatory and deterrent sentencing
goals.  this is so particularly when the conditional sentence includes optional
conditions of house arrest which i intend to impose here.
c)
i am concerned about the effect incarceration will have on mr.
khairkhahi.  he is a slight man who suffers from serious mental illnesses.  incarceration
in an ontario reformatory in 2025 invariably involves significant periods of
lockdown, overcrowding and loss of privileges:  see, for example,
r. v. kt,
2025
oncj 234
and the ombudsman’s annual report for 2024-2025.  mr. khairkhahi will
not have access to the supports that he currently has out-of-custody to assist
him with dealing with his mental illness.  these hardships in custody will
undoubtedly make his mental illnesses worse, not better.  if mr. khairkhahi
regresses, the threat he poses to the safety of the public will increase.  if
that were the case, i find that there is a far greater likelihood that he will
be more dangerous upon leaving a correctional facility than he currently is
now.
d)
a conditional sentence allows the court and the correctional
authorities to focus on monitoring and tracking mr. khairkhahi to protect the
public from the risk that he poses with significant conditions including a
house arrest and rigorous counselling conditions.
e)
a conditional sentence can be a ordered for a longer period than a
carceral sentence.  i intend to order a maximum conditional sentence here.
f)
a conditional sentence paired with three years
of probationary supervision in the community will ensure that mr. khairkhahi
receives rigorous, sustained monitoring and supervision for a period of five
years.  if he responds positively, an application can be brought to vary or
change the conditions.
i therefore impose the following sentence:
a)
a conditional sentence of two years less one day conditional.  the
conditional sentence will include a requirement that he be subject to house
arrest for 12 months.  for the remaining period, he will then be subject to a
curfew between the hours of 10 pm and 6 am.  both the house arrest and the
curfew will be subject to gps monitoring.
b)
three years of probation.
c)
a section 109 order for a period of ten years.
d)
an order for the taking of his dna.
released:  august 29, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson
see also exhibit 4, tab 8 for the referral itself.