ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. taboada
, 2025 oncj 192
date:  2025 04 09
court file no.:  toronto 21-45003981
between:
his
majesty the king
— and —
silvia taboada
before justice patrice f. band
heard: december 9, 10, 2024 and
march 3, 2025
reasons released: april 9, 2025
ms. m.
kwak ............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mr. p.
dotsikas........................................................ .…. counsel
for the accused, ms. taboada
band
j.:
i.
background
on the evening
of november 6, 2021, the car ms. taboada was driving rear-ended another car on
bathurst st. in toronto. police were called and attended. the arresting officer
(pc zold) came to believe that ms. taboada’s ability to drive was impaired by drug
and arrested her for that offence. he brought her to traffic services to be
evaluated by a drug recognition expert (dre). the dre formed his own grounds to
believe that ms. taboada’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol
and demanded that she provide samples of her breath into an approved
instrument. those tests showed that ms. taboada’s blood alcohol content (bac) was
well over twice the legal limit. she was charged with impaired driving and
“over 80.”
at trial, mr.
dotsikas alleged that pc zold violated ms. taboada’s s. 8 and 9
charter
rights to be free from unreasonable search and seizure and from arbitrary
detention by arresting her without reasonable and probable grounds. the trial
and
voir-dire
proceeded in blended fashion. the crown called pc zold,
his partner, the dre and two civilians who had been in the car that ms. taboada
struck. the defence called no evidence on the
voir-dire
or trial proper.
ii. the
issues
the central
issues at trial related to the s. 8 and 9
charter
application, namely:
1.
whether pc zold had reasonable and
probable grounds to arrest ms. taboada and demand that she submit to testing;
and
2.
if not, whether the bac results
should be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter
.
iii. summary of the facts
a summary of
the facts will place the issues and applicable legal principles in context.
pc zold is now
retired. at the time of this investigation, he had been a police officer for
32-33 years. in that time, he had conducted more than 24 impaired/over 80 investigations.
that evening,
he received information from dispatch regarding a personal injury accident
involving two motor vehicles
and a possible impaired driver. one vehicle had rear-ended the
other. the caller thought one of the drivers might be impaired; one of the
drivers, a female approximately 45 years of age was non-responsive and thought
to be “high.”
when
he arrived at the scene, pc zold interacted with ms. taboada once she had been
cleared by ems. he asked her for her driver’s licence, insurance and ownership.
she rummaged and fumbled through her car for some time before handing him a
green visa card. she ultimately provided her driver’s license, but she did not
provide all the documents he had asked for. according to him, her speech was a
bit slurred. her eyes were not blinking normally; they would stay closed for
longer than one would expect and they seemed tired or groggy. he found a bottle
of prescription pills containing acetaminophen, codeine and caffeine in the
car. he did not smell an odour of alcohol emanating from ms. taboada’s breath.
in his examination in chief, he testified that it was based on this
“constellation” that he formed the belief that ms. taboada’s ability to drive
was impaired by drug.
in
cross-examination, pc zold agreed with defence counsel that rummaging was a more
applicable description of what he observed ms. taboada doing in the car than
fumbling. for what it is worth, having viewed his bwc footage in court and
since, i find that both terms are apt. her car was very messy, and she spent
almost two minutes looking around in various parts of the car for her
documents. at one point, she had a hand full of cards and slips of paper and
one slid out. that, it seems to me, is the very definition of fumbling. with
respect to the visa card, mr. dotsikas put to pc zold that when he told her
“that’s your visa card” she replied “i know” and that by doing so she could
have been demonstrating that she had handed it to him to identify herself. he
testified that he knew she had responded but that he had not made a note of it.
he did not know why she had handed him her visa card. that makes sense to me,
because in fact, ms. taboada did not say “i know.” she said “yeah, i’m gonna go
to the other side” as she turned away and reached towards the passenger side of
the car.
when
asked how the pills had factored into his belief, at first he explained that
they had been in the back of his mind, but only “the smallest amount.” this is
because he did not know what they were. he believed she was impaired by some
sort of medication, but he did not know if it was that one. later, he explained
that they were not a factor because, in the end, the case did not go down the
dre route. while he acknowledged that he had not made notes of the medication,
and agreed that he had not told the dre about them, he had taken a photo of
them at the scene. he recalled having a conversation with ms. taboada about the
medication, but could not recall its contents. he did not tell the dre about
them because he did not know what they were and had some recollection that they
were in someone else’s name. for this reason, i do not accept that the medication
bottle factored into his grounds.
it
is difficult to understand how to reconcile pc zold’s testimony that the
medication factored into his grounds – even “the smallest amount” – with the
fact that he had no idea what it was, particularly when he did not mention it
to the dre. i find that, on a fair reading of his evidence, he kept the
medication in the back of his mind (and photographed it) so that it would be
known if the dre concluded that ms. taboada’s ability to operate a motor
vehicle was impaired by drug. in that case, it may have had evidentiary value.
pc
zold told ms. taboada that he thought she was either very tired or on some
medication that was affecting her ability to drive. he told her it was drugs or
medication or whatever else it might be. he also agreed that he did not know,
and was not sure, if she was impaired by a drug. that said, he repeated that he
believed that her ability was impaired by a drug or a combination of a drug and
fatigue. he said that this was his
opinion
and his
belief
, and
that he would not have arrested her if he had felt that only fatigue was at
play. he also told his partner that he thought she was “high.”
with
respect to slurring and unsteadiness, he indicated that neither was significant
or egregious. mr. dotsikas suggested that he expressed himself in that manner to
distance himself from the bwc footage which, he argued, showed neither. that is
not how i took his evidence. i must recall that i was not there and that while
bwc footage can be extremely helpful, it is no substitute for being present at
the scene. also, ms. taboada speaks with a slight accent, which can be mistaken
for slur. his reference to unsteadiness related to a time after he placed ms. taboada
under arrest and is therefore not relevant to his grounds. that said, in the
circumstances, i do not find that his testimony is contradicted by the bwc
footage.
similarly,
pc zold agreed that what he had noticed about ms. taboada’s eyes was “nothing
egregious.” having reviewed the bwc footage, i too observed that ms. taboada’s
eyes were blinking slowly, and it seemed as though her eyelids were heavy. pc
zold’s description was fair.
later,
pc zold was pressed as to whether he had acted on nothing more than a hunch
that ms. taboada’s ability was impaired by drug. he disagreed with the term
“hunch”, responding that he “strongly suspected that’s what it came to after
eliminating alcohol.”
lastly,
pc zold was not trained to perform standard field sobriety tests (sfsts), which
s. 320.27
of the
criminal code
makes available to officers, along with
approved screening devices, to assist them in determining whether they have
reasonable grounds. he also testified that not all officers were trained on
sfsts and that it was not mandatory when he was still working.
iv. applicable legal
principles
because the
arrest and subsequent breath tests were done without a warrant, the crown bears
the burden of demonstrating on a balance of probabilities that they were
conducted in compliance with the
charter
. in this case, that means
demonstrating that pc zold had reasonable and probable grounds to believe that ms.
taboada had committed the offence of driving while impaired by drug. as the
supreme court of canada explained
in
r. v. storrey
,
1990 canlii 125 (scc)
,
1 scr
241
at pp. 250-1
,
the
criminal code
requires
that an arresting officer must subjectively have reasonable and
probable grounds on which to base the arrest. those grounds must, in addition,
be justifiable from an objective point of view. that is to say,
a reasonable person placed in the position of the officer must be
able to conclude that there were indeed reasonable and probable
grounds for the arrest. on the other hand, the police need not demonstrate
anything more than reasonable and probable grounds. specifically they
are not required to establish a
prima facie
case for
conviction before making the arrest.
in
a drinking and driving context, the reasonable and probable grounds standard is
not an onerous one:
see
r. v. bush
2010 onca 554
at para
46
.
in
a drinking and driving case, the objective aspect of the reasonable and
probable grounds standard requires that the officer’s belief be supported by
objective facts such that a reasonable person in the place of the officer would
conclude that there were indeed reasonable and probable grounds to believe that
the suspect’s ability to drive was even slightly impaired by the consumption of
alcohol:
ibid
,
at paras. 38 and 48. the same must be true in
cases involving drugs.
in
bush
, the court also explained that
60
there is no
minimum time period nor mandatory questioning that must occur before an officer
can objectively have reasonable and probable grounds. there is no requirement
that a roadside sample be taken. the asd provides evidence of the blood alcohol
concentration in the suspect’s blood, not evidence of impairment. the trial
judge correctly found that if the officer subjectively and objectively had
reasonable and probable grounds that withstand judicial scrutiny, the failure
to invoke the roadside screening provisions was irrelevant. if the officer’s
belief failed to meet the requisite standard, there was a s. 8
charter
violation.
61
a trained
police officer is entitled to draw inferences and make deductions drawing on
experience. here, the investigating officer had 18 years’ experience. the trial
judge was entitled to take into consideration that experience and training in
assessing whether he objectively had reasonable and probable grounds…. in
addition, in determining whether reasonable and probable grounds exist, the officer
is entitled to rely on hearsay…. (internal citations omitted.)
as
such, the issue is not whether the officer could have conducted a more thorough
investigation. the question is whether when he or she made the breath demand he
or she “subjectively and objectively had reasonable and probable grounds to do
so”:
ibid,
at para. 70.
the
law does not demand the same of the police officer in an arrest situation as
that expected of a justice considering a search warrant. the police officer
must make his or her decision in a volatile environment with incomplete
information:
ibid,
at para. 43.
an
officer must take into account all the information he or she has and can only
disregard unreliable information. in doing so,
the officer is entitled to rely on hearsay:
ibid,
at paras. 48 and
61.
the
issue of whether there were reasonable and probable grounds involves an
examination of the totality of the circumstances, not a dissection of each one
of the individual
indicia
which may or may not exist; there is no
mathematical formula:
ibid,
at paras.  55-56.
in
a case involving a motor vehicle collision, “[
t]hat an accident occurred, including the
circumstances under which it occurred and the possible effects of it, must be
taken into account by the officer along with the other evidence in determining
whether there are reasonable and probable grounds to arrest for impaired
driving. consumption plus an unexplained accident may generate reasonable and
probable grounds although that may not always be the case”:
ibid,
at para. 54.
when
testifying in court about the reasons for which they take certain steps in an
investigation, such as making an asd demand, an arrest or a breath demand,
officers are not required to say
magic words
.
in
r. v. hall
,
(1995),
1995 canlii 647 (on ca)
,
22 o.r. (3d) 289
at para.
36
, the
court of appeal held that a trial judge can infer that an officer had the requisite
subjective grounds to arrest based on a fair reading of their evidence. in
r.
v.
clarke
,
o.j. no. 804
at para. 13 (s.c.j.)
, justice durno
explained:
there
are authorities which support the crown's contention the officer does not have
to say the “magic words.” in some cases this is related to whether the officer
had to state the reasonable and probable grounds for a breathalyzer demand ...
in all of cases it was determined that a court could infer from circumstantial
evidence the officer had the requisite belief without having said the “magic
words.” (internal citations omitted.)
what
is more, in relation to the requisite objective grounds, the reviewing court is
not limited to what the officer articulated in court; what must be considered
is the totality of the circumstances: see
r. v. censoni
,
o.j. no. 5189
at paras. 55-56 (scj)
. this includes all facts and circumstances
reasonably known to the officer at the time they formed their grounds: see
r.
v. yi
,
o.j. no. 1315
at para. 20
;
r. v. singh
,
o.j.
no. 5133
at para. 43 (s.c.j.)
and
r. v. fyfe
2023 onca 715
at
paras.
54-63
.
v. the arguments
mr. dotsikas
argues that, having ultimately testified that he had a “strong suspicion”, pc
zold must be “taken at his word” and, as a result, the arrest and what followed
violated ms. taboada’s s. 8 and 9 rights. he also argues that pc zold lacked
reasonable grounds because he did not turn his mind, subjectively, to the
question of impairment by
drug
. rather, he argues, pc zold defaulted to
that because he had ruled out alcohol. this is a problem because it amounts to
a process of elimination. also, fatigue and the effects of the accident were
potential factors. in other words, pc zold only suspected impairment. he
decided to arrest ms. taboada and find out later whether that impairment was
caused by drugs. a situation like this is what sfsts are for. the fact that
neither pc zold nor his partner knew how to administer sfsts amounted to a
breach and/or aggravated the existing breach. for this, mr. dotsikas points to
r.
v. au-yeung
,
2010 onsc 2292
, a case in which the arresting officer who
administered the asd did not know how to operate it.
on behalf of
the crown, ms. kwak argues that pc zold had reasonable and probable grounds to
arrest ms. taboada based on the totality of the circumstances. she also argues
that there are no required “magic words” and that it is open to me to consider
all facts reasonably known to pc zold. she suggests that i can take judicial
notice of the potential effects of codeine
but even without that, pc zold’s grounds were sufficient. also, she maintains
that an officer is under no obligation to employ an asd or sfsts. the question
is whether they have the requisite grounds. for this proposition, she relies on
r. v. marrese
,
o.j. no. 4467
at para. 19 (s.c.j.)
, citing
censoni
,
supra, at para. 50.
vi. analysis
a.
reasonable grounds
this case is
not, strictly speaking, about whether magic words are required. but it is about
a related issue concerning the weight that one dissonant word or phrase should
bear when it emerges in the context of a witness’s otherwise consistent testimony.
is mr. dotsikas right that i am bound to find that pc zold only had a “strong
suspicion”?
whether an
officer had reasonable grounds or merely a reasonable suspicion is an important
issue in many cases because it is a pivotal inflection point that determines
how an investigation can and should proceed. and of course, the entire aim of a
cross-examination can be centered on that distinction. but that does not mean
that after testifying repeatedly about their belief and opinion, anchored in
certain objective facts, an officer’s single mention of something less than
reasonable grounds must automatically dismantle the body of testimony that
preceded it. in some cases, doing so could risk giving one phrase magic
power
.
it could also run contrary to the principles above, indicating that a judge can
infer whether an officer had the requisite subjective reasonable grounds based
on a fair reading of their testimony.
in my view,
based on a fair reading of pc zold’s testimony, he had subjective reasonable grounds
to believe that ms. taboada’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired
by drug, notwithstanding his assertion, late in the cross-examination, that he
had a “strong suspicion.” i say this because pc zold is a very experienced
officer who testified numerous times that he had a belief and an opinion about
that issue, which was based on the grounds that he articulated and which i have
listed at para. 7 above (less the medication bottle). as i have found, those factors
were objectively justifiable.
in addition, what
pc zold was told over the police radio were other circumstances reasonably
known to but not articulated by him, namely: the existence of an unexplained
rear-end accident at a traffic light, that the female driver was not responsive
and was believed to be impaired and “high.” so, too, the fact that ms. taboada
had told him that she was fine regarding any effects of the accident; also, she
had been released by ems.
i find that
viewed in combination, these facts and circumstances, which were known or reasonably
known to pc zold, easily meet the objective reasonable grounds threshold. this
is not a case in which an officer faced with an unexplained accident and no
smell of alcohol defaulted to a subjective belief about impairment by drug. pc
zold’s belief that a drug was at play in this case was reasonable.
i do not find
that pc zold’s inability to perform sfsts, or the fact that training was not
mandatory, constituted breaches of s. 8 or could aggravate such a breach. the
provisions of s. 320.27 are not mandatory in this regard. i also note that the
facts
in
au-yeung
were very different: there, the officer had administered
an asd test despite not knowing how to do so.
as such, i find
that ms. taboada’s s. 8 and 9 rights were not violated, and would dismiss her
application.
if i am wrong
about that, and if pc zold’s subjective grounds missed the mark, it was by a
hair. as a result, out of an abundance of caution, i will undertake a section
24(2) analysis.
b.
section 24(2)
if pc zold
violated ms. taboada’s s. 8 and 9 rights, there can be no question but that the
evidence that was later gathered was obtained in a manner that violated her
rights.
section 24(2)
of the
charter
allows a court to exclude evidence where admitting it
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
in
r. v. grant
2009 scc 32
, at paras.
68-70
, the supreme court explained this concept.
the
phrase “bring the administration of justice into disrepute” must be understood
in the long-term sense of maintaining the integrity of, and public confidence
in, the justice system. exclusion of evidence resulting in an acquittal may
provoke immediate criticism. but s. 24(2) does not focus on immediate reaction
to the individual case. rather, it looks to whether the overall repute of the
justice system, viewed in the long term, will be adversely affected by
admission of the evidence. the inquiry is objective. it asks whether a
reasonable person, informed of all relevant circumstances and the values
underlying the
charter
, would conclude that the admission of the
evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
section
24(2)’s focus is not only long-term, but prospective. the fact of the
charter
breach means damage has already been done to the administration of justice.
section 24(2) starts from that proposition and seeks to ensure that evidence
obtained through that breach does not do further damage to the repute of the
justice system.
finally,
s. 24(2)'s focus is societal. section 24(2) is not aimed at punishing the
police or providing compensation to the accused, but rather at systemic
concerns. the s. 24(2) focus is on the broad impact of admission of the
evidence on the long-term repute of the justice system.
i must consider
three factors: (1) the seriousness of the violation; (2) the impact of the
violation on the accused's
charter
-protected interests; and (3)
society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits (
ibid
,
at para. 71). the focus must be on the long-term and prospective effect of a
remedy or lack of remedy. the supreme court of canada’s
decision in
r. v. le
2019 scc 34
also provides important guidance. at para. 141, the majority
provided the following explanation of the interplay between the
grant
factors:
while
the first two lines of inquiry typically work in tandem in the sense that both
pull towards exclusion of the evidence, they need not pull with identical
degrees of force in order to compel exclusion. more particularly, it is not
necessary that
both
of these first two lines of inquiry
support exclusion in order for a court to determine that admission would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute. of course, the more serious the
infringing conduct and the greater the impact on the
charter
-
protected interests, the stronger the case for exclusion (
r. v. mcguffie
,
2016
onca 36
, at para.
62
). but it is also possible that serious
charter
-infringing
conduct, even when coupled with a weak impact on the
charter
-protected
interest, will
on its own
support a finding that admission of
tainted evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. it
is the sum, and not the average, of those first two lines of inquiry that
determines the pull towards exclusion.
seriousness of the charter-infringing
conduct
this stage is
focused on whether the court must dissociate itself from the police conduct in
order to “preserve public confidence in the rule of law and its processes” (
grant
,
at para.
73
). to determine this, i must locate the police conduct on a spectrum
of seriousness.
in
r. v.
james
,
2025 onca 213
the ontario court of appeal recently explained that,
while
the supreme court of canada in
r. v. zacharias
2023 scc 30
was
divided on the impact of consequential breaches on the first
grant
factor,
the majority agreed that a pattern of
charter
breaches can
increase the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing conduct. here, even
though a s. 8 breach carries with it a s. 9 breach, no pattern emerges.
there is no
argument that pc zold was acting in bad faith, and i have found that he did not
try to distance himself from the bwc footage. based on his testimony and
experience, pc zold is not an officer who failed to understand basic and
well-entrenched
charter
principles, or was careless about them. missing
the reasonable grounds mark by a tiny margin in a drunk driving case is a far
cry from serious police misconduct. as such, if this factor favours exclusion
at all, it does so with minimal force.
impact of the breach
on ms. taboada’s charter-protected interests
in
r. v. tim
,
2022 scc 12
, at para.
90
, the supreme court of canada wrote that this line of
inquiry considers the impact of the breach(es) on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests and asks whether the breach “actually undermined the interests
protected by the right infringed.” i must identify “the interests protected by
the relevant
charter
rights” and evaluate “how seriously the breaches
affected those interests.” as with the first line of inquiry, i must then
“situate the impact on the accused’s
charter
-protected interests on a
spectrum, ranging from impacts that are fleeting, technical, transient, or
trivial, to those that are profoundly intrusive or that seriously compromise
the interests underlying the rights infringed.” as the court explained,
[t]he
greater the impact on
charter
-protected interests, the greater the risk
that admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. this is because “admission of the evidence may signal to the public
that
charter
rights, however high-sounding, are of little actual avail
to the citizen, breeding public cynicism and bringing the administration of
justice into disrepute.”
ms. taboada was
arrested (albeit not handcuffed), placed in the rear of a police car, taken to
a police station, and subjected to breath testing. this had an obvious and
significant impact on her liberty and privacy rights. this factor pulls in
favour of exclusion relatively strongly.
society’s interest
in adjudication on the merits
this line of
inquiry is concerned with the reliability of the evidence and its importance to
the crown’s case. the question is “whether the truth-seeking function of the
criminal process would be better served by admission of the evidence, or by its
exclusion” (
grant
, at para.
79
). reliable and critical evidence
generally pulls toward inclusion. that said, this factor cuts both ways and
ought not be permitted to overwhelm the analysis (
r. v. harrison
,
2009 scc 34 (canlii)
,
2 s.c.r. 494
, at para.
34
;
grant
, at para.
84
; and
r. v. paterson
,
2017 scc 15 (canlii)
,
1 s.c.r. 202
at para.
55
). as the court
stated in
grant
, “
while the public has a
heightened interest in seeing a determination on the merits where the offence
charged is serious … it also has a vital interest in having a justice system
that is above reproach, particularly where the penal stakes for the accused are
high” (
ibid
).
here, the
breath testing results are highly reliable evidence without which the crown’s
case on the over 80 count would be gutted. drunk driving is a serious and all
too common offence in our society. the public has a strong interest in the
prosecution of such cases on their merits, particularly when they involve high
bac and an accident.
this factor
clearly and strongly favours admission of the evidence.
balancing
the balancing
exercise does not lend itself to mathematical precision. the question is
whether, having regard to all the circumstances, the admission of the evidence
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. i find that the
admission of the evidence in this case would not have a significant or lasting
impact on the repute of, and the public’s confidence in, the administration of
justice. in fact, i believe that exclusion of the evidence in this case would
have those effects.
the
charter
-infringing
conduct postulated in this case was not deliberate or serious. the court is not
required to dissociate itself from pc zold’s conduct.
even though the
components of the second line of inquiry pull relatively strongly in favour of
exclusion, i find that, on balance, the sum of the first and second factors is
clearly outweighed by society's interest in the truth-seeking function of a
trial on the merits.
for these
reasons, the breath test results are admissible against ms. taboada.
vii. conclusion as to the over
80 count
all other
evidence related to this count having been admitted, the crown has proved beyond
a reasonable doubt that ms. taboada is guilty of the offence of driving with
excess alcohol.
viii. conclusion as to the
impaired driving count
the evidence of
the two civilians, a husband and wife whose vehicle was struck by ms. taboada’s
was not challenged. in the aggregate, their testimony demonstrated the
following:
•
when seen at a
prior light, ms. taboada seemed to be asleep behind the wheel;
•
one or two
lights down the road, her car rear-ended theirs at least twice;
•
she kept her
foot on the gas and her car in gear, such that her car was pushing against
theirs;
•
when she was
approached, she opened her door and appeared to be falling out of her car;
•
twice she was
told to stop the engine, to no avail;
•
she seemed
intoxicated; and
•
her speech was
difficult to understand.
based on that
testimony, combined with the other evidence in this case, the crown has proved beyond
a reasonable doubt that ms. taboada is guilty of operating her car while her
ability to do so was impaired by alcohol.
released:
april 9, 2025
justice patrice
f. band
while it may be open to me to take
judicial notice of the fact that codeine is an opioid that can cause sleepiness,
among other things, i would not count that among the things that pc zold knew
or “reasonably knew” because he made it clear that he did not know what codeine
is.