ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. beckford-salmon
, 2025 oncj 455
date:
2025 08 14
information
number:
998 22 12102998
burlington
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
savion
beckford-salmon
reasons
for sentence released on august 14, 2025
t. moran and a. khoorshed............................................................ counsel
for the crown
m. izadi.............................................. counsel
for the accused savion beckford-salmon
contents
overview
...
1
the enhanced
pre-sentence report
.
2
positions on
sentence
..
3
impact of the offence on the
complainant
.
4
principles of sentencing
..
4
the sentence
..
8
puddington j.:
overview
on may 30, 2024, i dismissed an application
pursuant to section 8 of the
charter,
challenging the search warrant in
this case.  following this ruling, mr. beckford-salmon pled guilty before me on
july 23, 2024 to one count of robbery and one count of possessing fentanyl for
the purpose of trafficking.
the facts are contained in an agreed statement
of fact, filed as exhibit 1.  on december 5, 2022, mr. beckford-salmon and
another individual, while wearing masks covering their faces, broke into unit
208 at 5240 dundas street in the city of burlington.  the complainant, a ms.
saipovski was asleep in the unit when the males entered.  she woke up upon
hearing them enter and was confronted by the males.  the other male (i.e., not
mr. beckford-salmon), had a black firearm in his right hand, and with his left
hand, motioned to ms. saipovski to be quiet, by putting his finger up to his
lips.  she instead yelled and a mr. thompson confronted the males.  mr.
thompson removed the bedroom door from its hinges and used it as a shield as he
moved towards the assailants.  this resulted in the other male, (again, not mr.
beckford-salmon) shooting one round from the black firearm into a wall of the
unit.
the police reviewed footage from the security
cameras at 5240 dundas street.  at 8:20 am on december 5, 2022 (about 26
minutes before the 911 call), a red kia forte sedan with ontario license plate
cwrf043 was seen entering the parking garage at 5240 dundas street.  it parked
in one of the spots in the garage and two males were observed walking from
where the kia was parked.  at 8:24 am, those same two males are seen to enter
the vestibule of the building and wait about 11 minutes before finally entering
the building.  they are wearing dark hoodies and light coloured pants.  they
are both also wearing dark coloured face masks.
eventually those males are seen to enter a unit
in the vicinity of unit b208 and a short time later, exit in a hurry using a
nearby stairwell.  at 8:46 am (around the time of the 911 call), the two males
get back into the kia forte and drive away.
once the officers determined the license plate
number, they did a ministry of transportation ontario (“mto”) search and
determined that the vehicle was registered to a 2010 kia forte in the name of “savion
beckford-salmon” with a date of birth of january 21, 2003.  the address listed
in the mto records listed 2-2461 whittaker drive in burlington.  the police
then got a search warrant for that address and the kia forte.
upon executing the search warrant on the
residence and the vehicle, the police found 17.4 grams of fentanyl packaged for
sale in the center console of the vehicle.
mr. beckford-salmon acknowledges that he
possessed the fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking and that he entered the unit
with the intent to commit robbery.
after finding him guilty, his counsel requested
an enhanced pre-sentence report (“epsr”).  unfortunately, these reports take quite
some time to prepare.  the epsr in this case was prepared on april 17, 2025 and
submissions on sentence were not made until june 11, 2025.
the enhanced
pre-sentence report
the enhanced pre-sentence report for mr.
beckford-salmon was prepared by the sentencing and parole project (spp) in
toronto, ontario.  it is now exhibit 2 on sentence.  among other things, it
provides for the following:
mr. beckford-salmon, 22, was born in toronto and
raised primarily by his mother. he has no prior criminal record and was 19 at
the time of the offences.  he was raised by his mother, with limited
involvement from his father and he has a younger sister and brother.  he
attended various schools, faced learning difficulties, and experienced racial
profiling and discrimination.  he also grew up in a low-income household, with
his mother often relying on social assistance.
mr. beckford-salmon grew up in the jane and
sheppard area of toronto, which the report describes as a community with a
strong sense of belonging, but also unfortunately exposed mr. beckford-salmon
to gun violence and other crime.  he therefore moved with his family to
burlington, in a predominantly white neighbourhood for safety, but he then
faced racial profiling and isolation.
examples of this racial profiling and isolation
were self-reported by mr. beckford-salmon and his mother to the person who
prepared the epsr.  they included examples of how, when mr. beckford-salmon
still lived in the jane and sheppard area, he claimed that the police would
follow him and his friends and ask them questions, even though they were not
apparently doing anything wrong.  when he moved to burlington, mr.
beckford-salmon observed that the police presence was lower, and the social
issues he faced in his old neighbourhood were not present.  after a year, he
expressed appreciation to his mother for the decision to move as he had made
some friends at his new school and came to appreciate the quiet neighbourhood.
he also admitted that the move disrupted the negative path that he had been at
risk of taking.  that being said, he still continued to experience tension with
others as a result of being a young black male.  one particularly alarming
overt example of racism was a racial slur that was scrawled across the bathroom
wall at his school.  a photo of this is found in the epsr.  while it is not
100% certain it was directed at him, he was one of a few black individuals at
the school and he no doubt was affected by it.
mr. beckford-salmon and the report also state
that the robbery and selling drugs came about because he was unemployed and
needed money to pay his living expenses and assist his mother.  it was a way to
make quick money, a situation many impoverished people experience, especially when
compared to his white peers who appeared to have everything.  he acknowledged,
though, that if he were the victim of a robbery, he would have been terrified,
and he understands now the impact his actions have had.
positions on sentence
the crown seeks a global sentence of 4 ½ years in
jail, a
section 109
of the
criminal code
weapons prohibition order and a
dna order.  two crowns participated in this sentencing.  counsel for the
ministry of the attorney general for ontario submits that a sentence of 3-4
years for the home invasion would be appropriate, but taking into account
totality, his time spent on strict bail conditions and the epsr, a global
sentence of 4 ½ years would address the necessary sentencing principles.
counsel for the public prosecution service of canada submits that a sentence of
4- 4 1/2 years would be appropriate for the fentanyl charges on their own, but
resolving globally with the other charges, 3 years for the drugs, plus the 1 ½
years for the robbery would be appropriate.  i will state that, given the
circumstances of the attempted robbery and the amount of fentanyl in this case,
the crown is not being unreasonable in their positions.
ms. izadi, on behalf of mr. beckford salmon,
submits a sentence of 2 years less a day, but served in the community as a
conditional sentence order, is appropriate to address the deterrence and
denunciation necessary for this offence.  she takes no issue with the ancillary
orders.
impact of the offence on the complainant
there
was no input from the victims of the attempted robbery in this case.  i have no
information about what the circumstances of the botched robbery were, except
that mr. beckford-salmon and an unknown accomplice entered the home in masks,
with the accomplice carrying and actually firing the firearm.  mr. beckford-salmon
mentions in his epsr that he was aware that the “victim had a significant
amount of money on the premises, and the money would have been enough for him
to sustain his life while he continued his search for employment”.
even
without a victim impact statement, it is clear that a home invasion by two
masked men, one armed with a firearm, is a terrifying event and a serious
offence.  as mentioned, mr. beckford-salmon acknowledges this.
principles of sentencing
i
have the very difficult task of determining the just disposition for such
serious offences committed by an otherwise upstanding young person.  to do
this, i must consider what constitutes a proportionate sentence in these
circumstances, having regard to the objectives and principles of sentencing
outlined in
section 718
of the
criminal code
and in the case law.
denunciation
and general and specific deterrence are the paramount sentencing considerations
in the circumstances of this case.  this was a terrifying and serious attempted
robbery, and a significant amount of fentanyl was found in mr.
beckford-salmon’s car.  members of our community should not be subjected to the
terrorizing behaviour exhibited by mr. beckford-salmon, and that behaviour must
be denounced.  it is also important to send a message to our community that
such conduct will be treated seriously by the courts.
in
addition to the robbery, the destructive nature of fentanyl,
and the opioid crisis in general are well known.  as our supreme court noted in
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
at paragraph
96
, fentanyl on our streets has
a real and deadly impact on the lives of canadians:
indeed, trafficking in fentanyl is so
deadly that various courts have described it as a national crisis, reflective
of an increased understanding of the gravity of the harm it causes.
it has led to countless overdoses and severe addictions that, of
course, lead to other crimes.  individuals like mr. beckford-salmon, who possess
these substances for the purpose of trafficking contribute to the pain and
suffering of those addicts and the host of other societal ills that result from
its destructive distribution.
i adopt the words of
the provincial court of alberta in
r.
v. frazer,
2017 abpc 116
at paragraph
11
:
trafficking in fentanyl is almost the equivalent of putting
multiple bullets in the chambers of a revolver and playing russian
roulette.  it is the most efficient killer of drug users on the market
today.
i
understand that mr. beckford-salmon was not charged with actually trafficking
the fentanyl in this case, but that was his ultimate intention.  upon
trafficking that drug, it had the potential to kill its ultimate user.
the
crown provided a helpful chart of cases that have considered the appropriate
range of sentence for fentanyl offences.  notably,
in
r. v. loor
,
2017 onca 696
, our court of
appeal for ontario, at paragraph 50, held that, generally speaking, even first
offenders who traffic significant amounts of fentanyl should expect to receive
significant penitentiary sentences.  the amount of fentanyl
in
loor
was
45 patches.  the court upheld a 6 year sentence.  mr. loor had a previous,
related record and did not have the mitigating circumstance of a guilty plea.
in
r. v. gagnon
2017 onsc 7470
, a decision of
justice conlon of our superior court in our jurisdiction of halton (albeit,
sitting in walkerton on that case) found that 12.34 grams of powder fentanyl
was a “significant amount” of fentanyl and a 4 year sentence was appropriate.
i do note that this sentence was for an individual with a significant criminal
record and it was after a trial.
in
addition to these very aggravating factors, however, sentencing is always an
individual process which requires flexibility in the application of all the
principles of sentencing to the relevant factors related to the offence and the
offender.  prospects of rehabilitation should always be considered, even in
cases where denunciation and deterrence are the primary factors.
mr.
beckford-salmon has no prior criminal record.  he was 19 years old at the time
of the offence.  he is a person of colour who, through the epsr, has shown his
struggles with racism.  i accept that, as mentioned by our court of appeal in
r.
v. morris
,
2021 onca 680
at paragraph
1
that:
it is beyond doubt that anti-black racism, including both
overt and systemic anti-black racism, has been, and continues to be, a reality
in canadian society, and in particular in the greater toronto area. that
reality is reflected in many social institutions, most notably the criminal
justice system. it is equally clear that anti-black racism can have a profound
and insidious impact on those who must endure it on a daily basis.
in
morris
, all of the charges arose out of mr. morris’s possession of a
loaded  handgun. at paragraph 181 of the decision, the court of appeal for
ontario noted:
mr. morris was in custody on other charges when sentenced on
these charges. understandably, given the positions of the parties, no one suggested
mr. morris should receive a conditional sentence. we would observe, however,
that all other factors being equal, had mr. morris been before the courts
exclusively on these charges and had a conditional sentence, like that ordered
in
anderson
(nsca),
been
available, the trial judge would have had to give that option serious
consideration.
mr.
beckford-salmon has been on house arrest with a gps ankle monitor since
december 7, 2022.  as of today, that is 981 days or 2 years, 8 months and 1
week.  there were a couple variations, including one to allow him to travel on
a family trip with his mom to quebec, but even then, the ankle monitor remained,
and he was not allowed to be alone.  what this means is that this young man has
not been allowed out of his house without the state monitoring his movements from
age 19 to 22 – a significant time in a young person’s life.
time
on bail can and should be considered when fashioning the proper sentence,
particularly when there is a condition of house arrest.  both the crown and
defence agree that this time on bail should be considered a mitigating
circumstance.   in
r. v. downes,
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca)
, o.j. no. 555 at paragraph
37
,
our court of appeal noted:
a trial judge faced with an offender who has spent time on
bail under house arrest should adopt a flexible approach. in the end, the
amount of credit and the manner in which it is taken into account as a
mitigating factor is a matter for the trial judge. that factor must be
considered along with the myriad of other mitigating and aggravating
circumstances that may impact on the sentence in a given case.
the
court continues:
credit for pre-trial bail conditions should be approached in
the following manner:
•
time spent on stringent pre-sentence bail conditions, especially
house arrest, is a relevant mitigating factor.
•
as such, the trial judge must consider the time spent on bail
under house arrest in determining the length of sentence.
•
the failure of the trial judge to explain why time spent on bail
under house arrest has not been taken into account is an error in principle.
•
the amount of credit to be given for time spent on bail under
house arrest is within the discretion of the trial judge and there is no
formula that the judge is required to apply.
•
the amount of credit will depend upon a number of factors
including, the length of time spent on bail under house arrest; the stringency
of the conditions; the impact on the offender's liberty; the ability of the
offender to carry on normal relationships, employment and activity.
as
mentioned, mr. beckford-salmon was on house arrest with an ankle monitor for
981 days or 2 years and 8 months.  that time on house arrest is extraordinary –
particularly for such a young man with no criminal record.  i want to be clear
– i am not saying his bail conditions were inappropriate.  given the offences
he was charged with, gps monitoring, house arrest and strict bail conditions
were reasonable. while i decline to put a specific number on it, it is a
significant mitigating factor in my view.  from age 19 to 22, mr.
beckford-salmon has been unable to leave his home or be without his surety.
that is a significant restraint on a young man’s life.  he has not been able to
work, and no doubt has missed out on countless opportunities as a result.  his mother,
in her letter to court, outlines the depression and defeatism he has often
felt.  i have no hesitation accepting that.  despite this, contrary to what we
unfortunately hear often amplified in the media, he has not breached his bail
and has obeyed all the rules, demonstrating an ability to follow court orders.
this is a young man who, in my view, is ready to turn his life around.
this, along with the other mitigating factors in this case i
outlined have led me to find that a sentence of 2 years less a day is
appropriate for mr. beckford salmon’s exceptional circumstances.   the next
question is to decide if it should be served in the community.  some of the
exceptional circumstances i find in this case are:
1.
he was 19 at the time of the offences.  had he committed the offence 23
months earlier, he would have been charged as a youth.
2.
despite his circumstances growing up and what was going on around him as
a child, he was never in trouble with the law prior to this offence;
3.
while he rightfully explored the issuance of the search warrant in this
case through a
charter
challenge, he immediately pled guilty after
receiving my judgment on that matter;
4.
while a firearm was present during this botched robbery, and it was in
fact discharged, there is no evidence that mr. beckford-salmon ever possessed
that gun or fired it.  there is also nothing to indicate that he had any
knowledge that his co-assailant possessed the firearm;
5.
despite his learning difficulties and having his life moved from toronto
to burlington, he graduated high school and was able to secure legitimate
employment prior to committing these offences;
6.
he has been on bail, being monitored by an ankle monitor for 981 days,
or 2 years and 8 months, and has demonstrated that he abides by court orders;
7.
his crime, while very serious, was incredibly unsophisticated.  he drove
a car, registered in his name, to a robbery.  the license plates were clearly
visible to closed caption video cameras.  the fentanyl was then found in that
same car registered to him.  that is to say, the crime itself shows his naivety
and youth.
8.
the epsr was very helpful in showing his background, growing up with a
single mother as a black male.  i find that mr. beckford-salmon was influenced
by his peers, despite his mother’s best efforts, to prevent him getting into
crime.
i
again turn to the decision in
morris
,
wherein the court of appeal states
at paragraph 124-125:
the restraint principle plays a specific and important role
in sentencing for serious crimes like crimes involving the unlawful possession
of loaded handguns. because of the seriousness of crimes involving the
possession of loaded handguns, some term of imprisonment will usually be
required to reflect the seriousness of the crime.
the requirement of a sentence of imprisonment does not,
however, end the operation of the restraint principle. that principle requires
the court, if it determines that a sentence of less than two years imprisonment
would be appropriate, to consider whether the term of imprisonment could be
served in the community under a conditional sentence. the restraint principle
favours conditional sentences over-incarceration if a conditional sentence is
consistent with the proportionality principle.
the sentence
in
the unique circumstances of this case, i am going to give mr. beckford-salmon
an unusual and exceptional chance.  he should be going to the penitentiary.  i
have struggled with fashioning this sentence, because there is little doubt
that these offences, even for first time offenders, demand a penitentiary
sentence.  but i cannot blindly stamp a number on this case, send mr. beckford-salmon
to jail and hope for the best, particularly after he has spent almost three
years on bail demonstrating his commitment to obeying court orders and turning
his life around.  i am required to exercise restraint when possible and treat
each case individually.  given everything i have outlined, including the epsr
and his time on bail awaiting this sentence, i find that a conditional sentence
followed by a probation order will adequately send the appropriate message to
him and the community, but will also help to give this young man with an
otherwise clean record a chance to prove himself.
i
adopt the words of justice nakatsuru of our superior court in
r. v. stewart,
2024 onsc 281
at paragraph
67
, where his honour states, while speaking to
mr. stewart:
another principle of sentencing supporting a conditional
sentence is that of restraint, given that you are a youthful first offender.
still another is the one mentioned in
morris
where we must do
better, when the facts call for it, when it comes to the overincarceration of
black offenders. a conditional sentence, in the right case, is an ideal way to
tackle this difficult problem.
were
i to sentence mr. beckford-salmon to a sentence above 2 years, probation would
not be an option.  rather than go to jail and be released in a year or so on
parole with no real supervision, he is going to be sentenced to a 2-year (less
a day) sentence and be subject to conditions.  he will then be on probation for
3 years.  essentially, he is going to have the possibility of jail hanging over
his head for the next 5 years of his life.  if he breaches any of these
conditions, i would not hesitate to convert his cso to an actual jail sentence.
the
conditions of the cso are as follows:
statutory conditions:
1. keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
2. appear before the court when required to do so by the
court.
3. report as the court directs in person to a supervisor
and thereafter report when required by the supervisor and in a manner directed
by the supervisor.
4. remain in ontario unless you have prior written
permission from the court or the supervisor to leave the province.
5. notify the court or supervisor in advance of any
change of name or address and promptly notify the court or supervisor of any
change in employment or occupation
other conditions
1.
report by telephone to a supervisor within 3 working days and after
that, at all times and places as directed by the supervisor or any person
authorized by a supervisor to assist in your supervision.
2.
co-operate with your supervisor. you must sign any releases necessary to
permit the supervisor to monitor your compliance and you must provide proof of
compliance with any condition of this order to your supervisor on request.
3.
house arrest:  you will be subject to house arrest for the full duration
of the cso.  remain in your residence or on the property of your residence at
all times, except
i)
on saturdays, between the hours of 12 pm to 4 pm in order to acquire the
necessities of life.
ii)
for any medical emergencies involving you or any member of your
immediate family.
iii)
for going directly to and from or being at school, employment, court
attendances, religious services and legal or medical or dental appointments;
iv)
for going directly to or from and being at assessment, treatment or
counselling sessions;
v)
for going directly to or from and performing community service hours
vi)
you will confirm your schedule in advance with the supervisor setting
out the times for these activities
vii)
with the prior written approval of the supervisor.  the written approval
is to be carried with you during these times
4.
do not change your place of residence without first obtaining the
written permission of your supervisor.
5.
you must present yourself at your doorway upon the request of your
supervisor or a peace officer for the purpose of verifying your compliance with
your home confinement condition.
6.
you shall report immediately for the purpose of arranging your enrolment
in the electronic supervision program.
7.
you shall participate and abide by the rules and regulations of that
program as required by your conditional sentence supervisor and/or designated
electronic supervision resource officer for the purpose of monitoring your
house arrest, home curfew, residence restriction, etc.
8.
you shall be placed on electronic supervision for the period of 1 year.
after 1 year, if there are no allegations of a breach, the electronic supervision
will cease, but you will still be subject to house arrest with the above
exceptions for the remainder of the cso.
9.
you shall permit the ministry of the solicitor general staff and/or
persons who are authorized by the ministry of the solicitor general associated
with the electronic supervision program to enter your residence for the purpose
of setting up, installing, maintaining, repairing or removing the electronic
supervision program equipment.
10.
do not possess any weapon(s) as defined by the
criminal code
(for
example: a bb gun, pellet gun, firearm, imitation firearm, cross-bow,
prohibited or restricted weapon or device, ammunition or explosive substance or
anything designed to be used or intended for use to cause death or injury or to
threaten or intimidate any person)
11.
attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed by the supervisor and complete them to the
satisfaction of the supervisor.
12.
you shall sign any release of information forms as will enable your
supervisor to monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
13.
you shall provide proof of your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
14.
perform 50 hours of community service work on a rate and schedule to be
directed by the supervisor but must be completed within 23 months of the start
date to this order
15.
make reasonable efforts to seek and maintain suitable work and provide
proof of same as required by the supervisor
following
the cso, he will be place on probation for 3 years.  the conditions of that
probation are similar to the cso, and are as follows:
1.
report by telephone to a probation officer within 3 working days of the
completion of your cso, and after that, at all times and places as directed by
the probation officer or any person authorized by a probation officer to assist
in your supervision.
2.
co-operate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases
necessary to permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your probation
officer on request.
3.
do not possess any weapon(s) as defined by the
criminal code
(for
example: a bb gun, pellet gun, firearm, imitation firearm, cross-bow,
prohibited or restricted weapon or device, ammunition or explosive substance or
anything designed to be used or intended for use to cause death or injury or to
threaten or intimidate any person)
4.
attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them
to the satisfaction of the probation officer.
5.
you shall sign any release of information forms as will enable your
probation officer to monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
6.
make reasonable efforts to seek and maintain suitable work and provide
proof of same as required by the probation officer.
the
section 109
of the
criminal code
order and the dna orders will also
issue.
assuming
mr. beckford-salmon completes this sentence without a breach he will
effectively have been subject to supervision by the state (including his time
on bail) from december 7, 2022 to august 14, 2030 – almost 8 years of his
life.  a good portion of that will have involved gps monitoring and house
arrest.  that, in my view, is a significant sentence for a first-time offender
and appropriately addresses the paramount principles of denunciation and deterrence
while also addressing the need for rehabilitation and restraint.
the
sentence can be allotted as 2 years less a day, concurrent on each count.  while
they could have been consecutive sentences, in all the circumstances of this
case, to address the principles of sentencing i have mentioned, i find that a global
sentence of 2 years less a day is appropriate.
mr.
beckford salmon, it is really too bad you did this.  your mother went to great
lengths to provide you a better life.  she spoke in her letter to the court
about how when you were a baby she vowed you would never end up being a
criminal.  despite her best efforts, you let her down and ended up exactly
where she tried so hard to avoid.  while you struggled throughout your life,
and i accept that, it must also be remembered that someone could have been shot
when you broke into that house, and others could have died from consuming the
fentanyl you possessed to traffic.  there is never an excuse to put others in
such serious danger.
i
am taking a chance on you, and if you do not abide by the conditions i have
mentioned, as i said, i will not hesitate to convert your sentence to an actual
jail sentence.  i suspect you came to this courthouse thinking you were going
to a federal penitentiary today.  i want you to remember that fear you probably
had today and do everything you can to stay on the right path.  you will not be
given a chance like this again.  i want you to work on yourself.  work to get a
job.  you and your mother have done so much to overcome adversity in the past,
you know you are capable of doing it.  don’t let yourself or your mom down
again.  most importantly, be a positive example to those who may be tempted to
go down the wrong path.
i
want to end with some words from your sister in the email she wrote to the
court.  i want her insightful and incredibly articulate words to stick with you
the rest of your life:
the younger version of him, the one who might have
internalized society’s low expectations, who may have felt lost, unheard and
disconnected, has disappeared.  that boy is gone.  in his place stands a man
who is grounded, thoughtful and fiercely determined.  he is no longer reacting
to life.  he is creating a life of his own.  he listens more, reflects more,
and moves forward with intention.
this
next part is not a court order.  but if possible, come back here in a few years
and show me what you have done.  where you are in life.  prove to me i was
right to take a chance on you.
released:  august
14, 2025
justice
b.g. puddington