PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 604 U. S. Part 1
                               Pages 20–21




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                             December 11, 2024


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
20                      OCTOBER TERM, 2024

                                 Syllabus


NVIDIA CORP. et al. v. E. OHMAN J:OR FONDER AB
                       et al.
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                  the ninth circuit
 No. 23–970. Argued November 13, 2024—Decided December 11, 2024
Certiorari dismissed. Reported below: 81 F. 4th 918.

 Per Curiam.
 The writ of certiorari is dismissed as improvidently
granted.
                                        It is so ordered.

   Neal Kumar Katyal argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the briefs were Katherine B. Wellington, Wil-
liam E. Havemann, Reedy C. Swanson, Sarah M. Lightdale,
Patrick J. Hayden, John C. Dwyer, Patrick E. Gibbs, Sa-
Page Proof Pending Publication
mantha A. Kirby, and Kathleen R. Hartnett.
   Deepak Gupta argued the cause for respondents. With
him on the brief were Jonathan E. Taylor, Gregory A. Beck,
Eric F. Citron, Jennifer D. Bennett, Salvatore J. Graziano,
and Andrew L. Zivitz.
   Colleen E. Roh Sinzdak argued the cause for the United
States as amicus curiae urging affirmance. With her on
the brief were Solicitor General Prelogar, Deputy Solic-
i tor General Stewart, Michael A. Conley, and Dani el
Staroselsky.*

  *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were filed for the Atlantic Legal
Foundation by Lawrence S. Ebner; for the Digital Chamber by Frank
Scaduto, Kevin B. Muhlendorf, and Krystal B. Swendsboe; for the Wash-
ington Legal Foundation et al. by James N. Kramer and Daniel A. Ru-
bens; and for Joseph A. Grundfest by Christopher G. Michel.
  Briefs of amici curiae urging affirmance were filed for the American
Association for Justice by Robert S. Peck and Jeffrey R. White; for the
Anti-Fraud Coalition by Tejinder Singh; for Certain Institutional Inves-
tors by Paul Bland; for Quantitative Experts by John Paul Schnapper-
                       Cite as: 604 U. S. 20 (2024)                   21

                                Counsel




Page Proof Pending Publication




Casteras, Mark C. Rifkin, Benjamin Y. Kaufman, Matthew M. Guiney,
Laura H. Posner, Carol V. Gilden, and Nicholas I. Porritt; and for Schol-
ars of Civil Procedure by J. Carl Cecere, Jeremy A. Lieberman, and
Emma Gilmore.
  Briefs of amici curiae were filed for Former SEC Officials by Samuel
H. Rudman, Daniel P. Chiplock, and Michael J. Miarmi; for Brian T.
Fitzpatrick by Javier Bleichmar and Joseph A. Fonti; and for Thomas
Fuller Ogden, pro se.
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to reflect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the official United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
Page Proof Pending Publication
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or filed briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

None