(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2023                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

 CHIAVERINI ET AL. v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, ET
                         AL.

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                  THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

       No. 23–50. Argued April 15, 2024—Decided June 20, 2024
This case involves a dispute between petitioner Jascha Chiaverini and
  police officers from Napoleon, Ohio. The officers charged Chiaverini,
  a jewelry store owner, with three crimes: receiving stolen property, a
  misdemeanor; dealing in precious metals without a license, also a mis-
  demeanor; and money laundering, a felony. After obtaining a warrant,
  the police arrested Chiaverini and detained him for three days. But
  county prosecutors later dropped the case. Chiaverini, believing that
  his arrest and detention were unjustified, then sued the officers, alleg-
  ing what is known as a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution
  claim under 42 U. S. C. §1983. To prevail on this claim, he had to show
  that the officers brought criminal charges against him without proba-
  ble cause, leading to an unreasonable seizure of his person. The Dis-
  trict Court, however, granted summary judgment to the officers, and
  the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed. The Court of Ap-
  peals held that Chiaverini’s prosecution was supported by probable
  cause. In holding this, the court did not address whether the officers
  had probable cause to bring the money-laundering charge. In its view,
  there was clearly probable cause to charge Chiaverini with the two
  misdemeanors. And so long as one charge was supported by probable
  cause, it thought, a malicious-prosecution claim based on any other
  charge must fail.
Held: The presence of probable cause for one charge in a criminal pro-
 ceeding does not categorically defeat a Fourth Amendment malicious-
 prosecution claim relating to another, baseless charge. The parties,
 and the United States as amicus curiae, all agree with this conclusion,
 which follows from both the Fourth Amendment and traditional com-
 mon-law practice.
2                 CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                                  Syllabus

       Under the Fourth Amendment, a pretrial detention counts as an un-
    reasonable seizure, and so is illegal, unless it is based on probable
    cause. See Manuel v. Joliet, 580 U. S. 357, at 364–369. Even when a
    detention is justified at the outset, moreover, it may become unreason-
    ably prolonged if the reason for it lapses. Rodriguez v. United States,
    575 U. S., 348, 354–357. So if an invalid charge causes a detention to
    start or continue, then the Fourth Amendment is violated. Bringing
    the invalid charge alongside a valid one does not categorically preclude
    this possibility. As the starkest possible example, consider a person
    detained on a drug offense supported by probable cause and a gun of-
    fense that is not. If the prosecutor drops the gun charge, leaving the
    person in jail on the drug charge alone, then the baseless charge has
    caused a constitutional violation by unreasonably extending the deten-
    tion. The person should not be categorically barred from bringing a
    Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim just because the base-
    less charge was brought along with a good one.
       The same conclusion follows from the common-law principles gov-
    erning malicious-prosecution suits. This Court has analogized claims
    like Chiaverini’s to the common-law tort of malicious prosecution, and
    has explained that the tort can inform courts’ understanding of this
    type of claim. Thompson v. Clark, 596 U. S. 36, 43–44. A plaintiff
    bringing a common-law malicious-prosecution suit had to show that an
    official initiated a charge without probable cause. But he did not have
    to show that every charge brought against him lacked an adequate ba-
    sis. See, e.g., Barron v. Mason, 31 Vt. 189, 198 (it was no “defen[s]e
    that there was probable cause for part of the prosecution”).
       These uncontested points suffice to doom the Sixth Circuit’s categor-
    ical rule barring a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim if
    any charge is valid. Of course, a Fourth Amendment malicious-prose-
    cution suit depends not just on an unsupported charge, but on that
    charge’s causing a seizure—like the arrest and three-day detention
    here. The parties and amicus curiae offer three different views of how
    that causation element is met when a valid charge is also in the pic-
    ture. But this issue is not properly before the Court, so the Sixth Cir-
    cuit should address it on remand. Pp. 4–8.
Vacated and remanded.

KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SOTOMAYOR, KAVANAUGH, BARRETT, and JACKSON, JJ., joined.
THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined. GOR-
SUCH, J., filed a dissenting opinion.
                        Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                    No. 23–50
                                   _________________


      JASCHA CHIAVERINI, ET AL., PETITIONERS
         v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, ET AL.
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
                                 [June 20, 2024]

   JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
   This case involves what is often called a Fourth Amend-
ment malicious-prosecution claim under 42 U. S. C. §1983.
To succeed on such a claim, a plaintiff must show that a
government official charged him without probable cause,
leading to an unreasonable seizure of his person. See
Thompson v. Clark, 596 U. S. 36, 43, and n. 2 (2022). The
question presented here arises when the official brings mul-
tiple charges, only one of which lacks probable cause. Do
the valid charges insulate the official from a Fourth Amend-
ment malicious-prosecution claim relating to the invalid
charge? The answer is no: The valid charges do not create
a categorical bar. We leave for another day the follow-on
question of how to determine in those circumstances
whether the baseless charge caused the requisite seizure.
                              I
  This dispute began with a set of peculiar interactions be-
tween a jewelry store owner and police officers in Napoleon,
Ohio. See generally App. to Pet. for Cert. 2a–7a. The jew-
eler, Jascha Chiaverini, bought a ring for $45 from a (petty)
jewel thief. The ring’s rightful owners found out about the
2            CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                      Opinion of the Court

sale, and asked Chiaverini to return their property. Chia-
verini said no, so the owners contacted the police. Two of-
ficers, on a later visit to the store, directed Chiaverini to
surrender the ring to its owners. But Chiaverini refused
their request too, saying that it contradicted a letter he had
just received from the police department telling him to re-
tain the ring as evidence. And when repeating his refusal
to another officer the next day, Chiaverini suggested (for
reasons unclear) that he was operating his store without a
license. The result of that (shall we say, unprofitable) ex-
change was that the police turned their attention from the
original theft to Chiaverini’s business.
   Soon afterward, the officers launched a criminal proceed-
ing against Chiaverini in municipal court. They filed three
complaints, each charging him with a separate offense.
Two were misdemeanors: receiving stolen property and
dealing in precious metals without a license. The third was
a felony: money laundering. To support their accompany-
ing application for an arrest warrant, the officers submitted
an affidavit making the case for probable cause on all three
charges, but focusing on the felony. See App. 16–17. For
that charge to succeed, Chiaverini must have known when
he bought the ring that the transaction involved the pro-
ceeds of unlawful activity. See Ohio Rev. Code Ann.
§1315.55(a)(1) (Lexis 2016). In support of that element, the
officers averred that Chiaverini always suspected the ring
was stolen. The judge issued the requested warrant, and
the officers arrested Chiaverini. He remained in custody
for three days, until his arraignment. At a later prelimi-
nary hearing, the judge heard testimony about the evidence
supporting the officers’ probable-cause allegations. See
App. to Pet. for Cert. 6a–7a. The officers maintained that
Chiaverini had admitted in their interview to suspecting
the ring was stolen; Chiaverini denied making any such
statement. At the hearing’s conclusion, the judge again
found probable cause, and set the three charges for trial.
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            3

                      Opinion of the Court

   The county prosecutors, though, decided that they had
higher priorities. They failed to present the case to a grand
jury in the required time. The court therefore dismissed the
charges.
   But Chiaverini decided not to let matters lie. After all,
he had been arrested and held for three days, he thought
unjustifiably. So he sued the officers under §1983, alleging
what is known as a Fourth Amendment claim for malicious
prosecution. To prevail on that claim, he had to show
(among other things) that the officers brought criminal
charges against him without probable cause. See Thomp-
son, 596 U. S., at 43–44. In addressing that issue, he gave
special attention to the felony charge for money laundering.
According to Chiaverini, the officers lacked probable cause
for that charge for two reasons. First, they had no reason
to think he knew the ring was stolen; indeed, he said, their
claim that he had admitted as much was an out-and-out lie.
And second, they could not show—as, in his view, Ohio law
required—that the ring was worth more than $1,000; its
value was far less, more in line with its $45 purchase price.
So Chiaverini concluded that his suit satisfied the “without
probable cause” element of a Fourth Amendment malicious-
prosecution claim.
   After the District Court granted summary judgment to
the officers, the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit af-
firmed. It did so without addressing either of Chiaverini’s
arguments about the felony charge’s basis. In the Sixth Cir-
cuit’s view, there was clearly probable cause to support the
two misdemeanor charges the officers had filed. See App.
to Pet. for Cert. 11a–16a. And because that was true, the
court thought, the validity of the felony charge did not mat-
ter. “So long as probable cause supports at least one charge
against Chiaverini (like his receipt-of-stolen-property viola-
tion),” then his malicious-prosecution claim “based on other
charges (like his money-laundering charge) also fail[s].”
Id., at 10a. Or said another way, a single valid charge in a
4             CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                      Opinion of the Court

proceeding would insulate officers from a Fourth Amend-
ment malicious-prosecution claim relating to any other
charges, no matter how baseless.
   In taking that position, the Sixth Circuit stepped out on
its own. Three other Courts of Appeals have held that the
presence of probable cause for one charge does not automat-
ically defeat a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution
claim alleging the absence of probable cause for another
charge. See Williams v. Aguirre, 965 F. 3d 1147, 1159–1162
(CA11 2020); Johnson v. Knorr, 477 F. 3d 75, 83–85 (CA3
2007); Posr v. Doherty, 944 F. 2d 91, 100 (CA2 1991).
   We granted certiorari to resolve that circuit split, 601
U. S. ___ (2023), and we now vacate the decision below.
                               II
   Section 1983 enables an individual to recover damages
from a state or local official for the deprivation of a consti-
tutional right. Such a suit is of course premised on a con-
stitutional violation. But its elements and rules may also
be shaped by common-law tort principles, against whose
backdrop §1983 was enacted. See Manuel v. Joliet, 580
U. S. 357, 370 (2017). To determine the precise contours of
a constitutional claim under §1983, we have held, a court
should identify the “most analogous” common-law tort to
the constitutional harm alleged. Ibid. And the court should
incorporate that tort’s requirements to the extent con-
sistent with “the values and purposes of the constitutional
right at issue.” Ibid.; Thompson, 596 U. S., at 43.
   The claim Chiaverini brought—a Fourth Amendment
malicious-prosecution claim—emerged from that method.
The constitutional violation alleged in such a suit is a type
of unreasonable seizure—an arrest and detention of a per-
son based on a criminal charge lacking probable cause. In
Thompson v. Clark, we analogized a suit alleging that
Fourth Amendment wrong to the common-law tort of mali-
cious prosecution. See id., at 43–44. The “gravamen” of
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            5

                     Opinion of the Court

both, we reasoned, is “the wrongful initiation of charges
without probable cause” (though in the Fourth Amendment
context, those charges must cause a seizure as well). Id., at
43, and n. 2. Because of that similarity, the malicious-pros-
ecution tort can inform a court’s understanding of the kind
of claim Chiaverini has brought.
   The question here is whether a Fourth Amendment ma-
licious-prosecution claim may succeed when a baseless
charge is accompanied by a valid charge. The Court of Ap-
peals, as described above, answered that question with a
categorical no: Even if the felony count lacked probable
cause, the Sixth Circuit held, Chiaverini could not recover
because the misdemeanor counts were adequately sup-
ported. See supra, at 3–4. But a funny thing happened on
the way to this Court. The officers now agree with Chia-
verini that there is no such flat bar. See Brief for Officers
24–27; Brief for Chiaverini 2–3. And the United States as
amicus curiae also argues that the Sixth Circuit rule is
wrong. See Brief for United States 10. We agree with them
all. Consistent with both the Fourth Amendment and tra-
ditional common-law practice, courts should evaluate suits
like Chiaverini’s charge by charge.
   Consider first how that result follows from established
Fourth Amendment law. Under that Amendment, a pre-
trial detention (like the one Chiaverini suffered) must be
based on probable cause. See Manuel, 580 U. S., at 364–
369 . Otherwise, such a detention counts as an unreasona-
ble seizure. And even when a detention is justified at the
outset, it may become unreasonably prolonged if the reason
for it lapses. See Rodriguez v. United States, 575 U. S. 348,
354–357 (2015). So if an invalid charge—say, one fabri-
cated by police officers—causes a detention either to start
or to continue, then the Fourth Amendment is violated.
And that is so even when a valid charge has also been
brought (although, as soon noted, that charge may well
complicate the causation issue, see infra, at 7). Take the
6            CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                      Opinion of the Court

starkest possible example. A person is detained on two
charges—a drug offense supported by probable cause and a
gun offense built on lies. The prosecutor, for whatever rea-
son, drops the (valid) drug charge, leaving the person in jail
on the (invalid) gun charge alone. The inclusion of the base-
less charge—though brought along with a good charge—has
thus caused a constitutional violation, by unreasonably ex-
tending the pretrial detention. Even the Napoleon officers
agree, offering a similar example. See Brief for Officers 25;
see also Brief for United States 17–18. So the bringing of
one valid charge in a criminal proceeding should not cate-
gorically preclude a claim based on the Fourth Amendment.
   And the same conclusion follows from the common-law
principles governing malicious-prosecution suits when
§1983 was enacted. As noted above, a plaintiff in such a
suit had to show that an official initiated a charge without
probable cause. See Thompson, 596 U. S., at 44; supra, at
4–5. He did not have to show, however, that every charge
brought against him lacked an adequate basis. Rather,
courts in that era assessed probable cause charge by charge.
“[I]f groundless charges” are “coupled with others which are
well founded,” explained one State Supreme Court, the
groundless ones could still “constitute a valid cause of ac-
tion.” Boogher v. Bryant, 86 Mo. 42, 49 (1885). Another
agreed: It was no “defen[s]e that there was probable cause
for part of the prosecution.” Barron v. Mason, 31 Vt. 189,
198 (1858). Or as a leading treatise from the era summa-
rized the rule: “It is not necessary that the whole proceed-
ings be utterly groundless.” 2 S. Greenleaf, Law of Evi-
dence 400 (10th ed. 1868); see 1 F. Hilliard, Law of Torts or
Private Wrongs §1, p. 435, n. (b) (4th ed. 1874). One bad
charge, even if joined with good ones, was enough to satisfy
the malicious-prosecution tort’s “without probable cause”
element.
   All that dooms the Sixth Circuit’s categorical rule barring
a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim if any
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)              7

                       Opinion of the Court

charge is valid. That rule receives support from neither
half of the claim’s name—neither from the Fourth Amend-
ment nor from the malicious-prosecution tort we have in-
voked as an analogy. And the question is not close, as
shown by the parties’ decision not to contest it in this Court.
   The parties, almost needless to say, have found a substi-
tute ground of disagreement, involving the element of cau-
sation. As noted earlier, a Fourth Amendment malicious-
prosecution suit depends not just on an unsupported
charge, but on that charge’s causing a seizure—like the ar-
rest and three-day detention here. See supra, at 4–5. The
parties and amicus curiae offer three different views of how
that causation element is met when a valid charge is also
in the picture. Chiaverini’s test is the easiest to satisfy. On
his view, when both valid and invalid charges are brought
before a judge for a probable cause determination, the war-
rant the judge issues is irretrievably tainted; so any deten-
tion depending on that warrant is the result of the invalid
charge. See Reply Brief 10–11 (citing Williams, 965 F. 3d,
at 1165); Tr. of Oral Arg. 5–6, 26–28. The United States
disagrees, arguing for the use of a but-for test to discover
whether the invalid charge, apart from the valid ones,
caused a detention. See id., at 41–43. The question then
would be whether the judge “in fact [would] have author-
ized” the detention had the invalid charge not been present.
Id., at 43. And finally, the officers urge a still stricter test.
In their view, the question is whether the judge, absent the
invalid charge, could have legally authorized the deten-
tion—regardless of what he really would have done. See
Brief for Officers 20–21.
   But that new dispute is not now fit for our resolution. The
test for finding causation is no part of the question we
agreed to review. For that reason, it was not fully briefed.
And most important, the court below did not address the
matter, nor have many others. “[W]e are a court of review,
not of first view.” Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S. 709, 718,
8            CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                     Opinion of the Court

n. 7 (2005). So we leave the causation question in the hands
of the Sixth Circuit, as it further considers Chiaverini’s
Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim.
  We accordingly vacate the judgment of the Court of Ap-
peals and remand the case for further proceedings con-
sistent with this opinion.

                                            It is so ordered.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            1

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                          No. 23–50
                         _________________


     JASCHA CHIAVERINI, ET AL., PETITIONERS
        v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, ET AL.
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
                        [June 20, 2024]

   JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins, dis-
senting.
   Jascha Chiaverini sued several city officials for damages
under 42 U. S. C. §1983. He alleged that they violated his
Fourth Amendment rights by subjecting him to a malicious
prosecution. I continue to adhere to my belief that a “mali-
cious prosecution claim cannot be based on the Fourth
Amendment.” Manuel v. Joliet, 580 U. S. 357, 378 (2017)
(ALITO, J., joined by THOMAS, J., dissenting). Accordingly,
I would affirm the dismissal of Chiaverini’s claim.
   To raise a successful claim under §1983, a plaintiff must
allege the deprivation of “rights, privileges, or immunities
secured” to him by the Constitution. 42 U. S. C. §1983. “In
order to flesh out the elements of th[e alleged] constitu-
tional tort,” the Court generally analogizes to common-law
torts. Manuel, 580 U. S., at 378 (opinion of ALITO, J.); see
also Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U. S. 477, 483–484 (1994). In
this case, Chiaverini claims that he was seized without
probable cause in violation of the Fourth Amendment.
Chiaverini principally relies on this Court’s decision in
Thompson v. Clark, 596 U. S. 36 (2022), to argue that the
appropriate tort analog for this claim is malicious prosecu-
tion. In Thompson, the Court held that malicious prosecu-
tion, a tort addressing “the wrongful initiation of charges
without probable cause,” is most analogous to a Fourth
2             CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                      THOMAS, J., dissenting

Amendment unreasonable-seizure claim. Id., at 43.
   Thompson was wrongly decided. A malicious-prosecution
claim bears little resemblance to an unreasonable seizure
under the Fourth Amendment. Consider what is required
to establish a claim of malicious prosecution. A plaintiff
must show that “(i) the suit or proceeding was ‘instituted
without any probable cause’; (ii) the ‘motive in instituting’
the suit ‘was malicious,’ . . . ; and (iii) the prosecution ‘ter-
minated in the acquittal or discharge of the accused.’ ” Id.,
at 44 (quoting T. Cooley, Law of Torts 181 (1880)). These
elements have no overlap with what is required to establish
a Fourth Amendment seizure violation.
   First, an unreasonable seizure can occur without any
prosecution—for instance, if a person “is arrested without
probable cause” and “released before any charges are filed.”
596 U. S., at 51–52 (ALITO, J., dissenting). Second, an un-
reasonable seizure does not depend on the seizing official’s
motives. “[W]hile subjective bad faith, i.e., malice, is the
core element of a malicious prosecution claim, it is firmly
established that the Fourth Amendment standard of rea-
sonableness is fundamentally objective.” Manuel, 580
U. S., at 379 (opinion of ALITO, J.). Thus, “[i]f a law enforce-
ment officer makes an arrest without probable cause, the
arrest is unreasonable and therefore unconstitutional even
if the officer harbors no ill will for the arrestee. Likewise,
if an officer makes an arrest with probable cause, there is
no Fourth Amendment violation regardless of the ‘actual
motivations of the individual officers involved.’ ” Thomp-
son, 596 U. S., at 52 (opinion of ALITO, J.) (quoting Whren
v. United States, 517 U. S. 806, 813 (1996)). Third, an un-
reasonable seizure violates the Constitution regardless of
how any subsequent prosecution is resolved. See Manuel,
580 U. S., at 379 (opinion of ALITO, J.).
   Nor is an unreasonable seizure necessary to prove a
malicious-prosecution claim. A malicious prosecution can
occur without any seizure at all. For example, “[t]here are
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            3

                     THOMAS, J., dissenting

cases in which defendants charged with nonviolent crimes
agree to appear for arraignment and are then released
pending trial on their own recognizance. These defendants
. . . may bring a common-law suit for malicious prosecution
. . . , but they are not seized.” Thompson, 596 U. S., at 52–
53. And, “since a malicious-prosecution claim does not re-
quire a seizure, it obviously does not require proof that the
person bringing suit was seized without probable cause.”
Id., at 53.
    Malicious prosecution is therefore not an appropriate tort
analog for a §1983 claim alleging a seizure in violation of
the Fourth Amendment. The Court has never provided a
fulsome explanation for why it has concluded otherwise.
When the Court first recognized a malicious-prosecution
claim under the Fourth Amendment in Thompson, it essen-
tially adopted the holdings of certain lower courts. Id., at
43. The Court offered two meager sentences to justify doing
so. It reasoned that “the gravamen of the Fourth Amend-
ment claim for malicious prosecution . . . is the wrongful in-
itiation of charges without probable cause. And the wrong-
ful initiation of charges without probable cause is likewise
the gravamen of the tort of malicious prosecution.” Ibid.
That is incorrect. A malicious-prosecution claim protects
against the malicious initiation of charges, but the Fourth
Amendment protects against unreasonable searches and
seizures—it does not matter whether the official acted with
malice or charges are ever initiated. See id., at 54–55 (opin-
ion of ALITO, J.). Today, the Court rests solely on Thomp-
son’s mistaken reasoning to conclude that Chiaverini can
raise his claim. See ante, at 4–5.
    The Court’s decision to forge ahead with combining the
malicious-prosecution and Fourth Amendment frameworks
will inevitably create confusion. As I have explained, an
unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment re-
quires a seizure; a malicious-prosecution claim does not.
4                CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                          THOMAS, J., dissenting

Supra, at 2. To resolve this mismatch, the Court has de-
cided that a plaintiff must show that a malicious prosecu-
tion caused an unreasonable seizure. See Thompson, 596
U. S., at 43, n. 2; ante, at 1, 7. While that grafting solved
one problem, it created several more. Because the Court
has mixed two distinct legal frameworks, it is unclear what
doctrines actually govern its requirement that a malicious
prosecution cause a seizure. For example, if a plaintiff has
multiple charges, how does a court determine whether a
particular unfounded charge caused the seizure? See ante,
at 7 (listing three possible causation theories). What type
of evidence is relevant? See Brief for Petitioners 40 (argu-
ing that Chiaverini would not have been seized absent the
unfounded charge since a similar defendant with a credible
charge was not seized). And, what happens if an unfounded
charge merely changes the nature of the seizure? See Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 18 (arguing that an un-
founded charge causes a seizure if it results in a more force-
ful arrest). The Court’s claim for malicious prosecution un-
der the Fourth Amendment requires resolving these
questions and more. To date, the Court has offered little
guidance on how to do so.* And, because the claim at issue
is the Court’s own creation, lower courts cannot turn to the
common law or Fourth Amendment doctrine for answers.
Instead, they are left to make their best guess at how the
Court would define its novel claim.
   I would take a far simpler course. Instead of forcing a
square peg into a round hole by judging an unreasonable

——————
  *The Court purports to offer some guidance today by rejecting the
Sixth Circuit’s “categorical rule barring a Fourth Amendment malicious-
prosecution claim if any charge is valid.” Ante, at 6–7. But, it is not clear
that the Sixth Circuit even has such a rule. See Howse v. Hodous, 953
F. 3d 402, 409, n. 3 (2020) (recognizing that the underlying inquiry is
whether an unfounded charge “change[s] the nature of the seizure”); see
2023 WL 152477, *4 (Jan. 11, 2023) (citing Howse). It is thus unclear
what, if any, doctrinal progress today’s decision makes.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            5

                    THOMAS, J., dissenting

seizure based on the malicious-prosecution tort, I would
“hold that a malicious-prosecution claim may not be
brought under the Fourth Amendment.” Thompson, 596
U. S., at 60 (opinion of ALITO, J.). I respectfully dissent.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)              1

                      GORSUCH, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                           _________________

                            No. 23–50
                           _________________


      JASCHA CHIAVERINI, ET AL., PETITIONERS
         v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, ET AL.
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
                          [June 20, 2024]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH, dissenting.
   Section 1983 performs vital work by permitting individu-
als to vindicate their constitutional rights in federal court.
But it does not authorize this Court to expound new rights
of its own creation. As this Court has put it, §1983 does not
turn the Constitution into a “ ‘ “font of tort law.” ’ ” Albright
v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 284 (1994) (Kennedy, J., concurring
in judgment) (quoting Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U. S. 527, 544
(1981)).
   Despite that settled rule, the Court today doubles down
on a new tort of its own recent invention—what it calls a
“Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution” cause of ac-
tion. Ante, at 1; see Thompson v. Clark, 596 U. S. 36, 43–
44 (2022). Respectfully, it is hard to know where this tort
comes from. Stare for as long as you like at the Fourth
Amendment and you won’t see anything about prosecu-
tions, malicious or otherwise. Instead, the Amendment pro-
vides that “[t]he right of the people to be secure . . . against
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated.”
   As its language suggests, the Fourth Amendment sup-
plies nothing like a common-law claim for malicious prose-
cution. Ante, at 2 (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see Cordova v.
Albuquerque, 816 F. 3d 645, 662–663 (CA10 2016) (Gor-
such, J., concurring in judgment). Just consider some of the
differences. This Court has long held that the touchstone
2             CHIAVERINI v. CITY OF NAPOLEON

                     GORSUCH, J., dissenting

of the Fourth Amendment is objective reasonableness. But
a common-law malicious-prosecution claim focuses on the
defendant’s subjective intent. Ante, at 2 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.). The Fourth Amendment addresses the per-
missibility of a seizure. But a common-law malicious-pros-
ecution claim can (and usually does) proceed without one.
Ante, at 2–3. A seizure in violation of the Fourth Amend-
ment can (and often does) take place without the initiation
of any judicial process. But the whole point of a malicious-
prosecution claim is to contest the appropriateness of past
judicial proceedings. Ante, at 2. For all these reasons, it’s
“pretty hard to see how you might squeeze anything that
looks quite like the common law tort of malicious prosecu-
tion into the Fourth Amendment.” Cordova, 816 F. 3d, at
663 (opinion of Gorsuch, J.).
   That is not to say no constitutional hook exists for a §1983
claim addressing the malicious use of process. Rather, it
seems to me only that such a claim would be more properly
housed in the Fourteenth Amendment. See Albright, 510
U. S., at 283 (opinion of Kennedy, J.). After all, unlike the
Fourth Amendment, that provision does focus on judicial
proceedings, guaranteeing those who come before our
courts “due process” of law. See ibid.; Thompson, 596 U. S.,
at 43, n. 2; Cordova, 816 F. 3d, at 662 (opinion of Gor-
such, J.). Inhering in due process is a promise that courts
will respect, at the least, those “customary procedures to
which freemen were entitled by the old law of England.”
Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U. S. 148, 176 (2018) (GORSUCH,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (internal
quotation marks omitted). And the common law has long
recognized a tort of malicious prosecution to protect against
the abuse of judicial proceedings. Albright, 510 U. S., at
283 (opinion of Kennedy, J.).
   Admittedly, a procedural due process claim for malicious
prosecution may come with its own set of limitations. After
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             3

                     GORSUCH, J., dissenting

all, when a State provides exactly the tort claim the plain-
tiff seeks, it provides him with all the process he is due. See
id., at 284; Cordova, 816 F. 3d, at 662 (opinion of Gor-
such, J.). And, consistent with the common law, many
States recognize claims for malicious prosecution. Indeed,
the relevant State here (Ohio) permits such a cause of ac-
tion. Notably, too, unlike the tort this Court seeks to cobble
together under the aegis of the Fourth Amendment, Ohio’s
tort does not require a plaintiff to prove that he was seized.
Compare Trussell v. General Motors Corp., 53 Ohio St. 3d
142, 145–146, 559 N. E. 2d 732, 735–736 (1990), with ante,
at 1 (majority opinion). Of course, should a State fail to
provide a malicious-prosecution claim to secure his proce-
dural due process rights, or a fair forum for entertaining
such a claim, a federal court may need to act to vindicate
§1983 and the promise of procedural due process. Cordova,
816 F. 3d, at 665 (opinion of Gorsuch, J.). But in many
cases (this one included), a State malicious-prosecution
claim may be both easier for a plaintiff to prove than any-
thing the Court today provides and sufficient to ensure any
process he is due. Albright, 510 U. S., at 285–286 (opinion
of Kennedy, J.); Cordova, 816 F. 3d, at 662 (opinion of Gor-
such, J.).
   For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.