(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2024                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

                    PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                 THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

       No. 24–275.      Argued April 21, 2025—Decided June 12, 2025
Federal inmate Donte Parrish alleges that he was placed in restrictive
  segregated confinement for 23 months based on his suspected involve-
  ment in another inmate’s death. After a hearing officer cleared him of
  wrongdoing, Parrish filed suit in Federal District Court seeking dam-
  ages for his time in segregated confinement. The District Court dis-
  missed his case on March 23, 2020, holding that some claims were un-
  timely and others unexhausted. When the court’s order reached the
  federal prison two weeks later, Parrish was no longer there, having
  been transferred to a different facility. Parrish received the dismissal
  order three months after it was issued and promptly filed a notice of
  appeal, explaining his delayed receipt. The Fourth Circuit recognized
  that Parrish’s notice of appeal came well after the 60-day appeal period
  for suits against the United States, so it construed Parrish’s filing as a
  motion to reopen the time to appeal under 28 U. S. C. §2107(c). On
  remand, the District Court granted reopening for 14 days. Parrish did
  not file a second notice of appeal. Although both Parrish and the
  United States argued that the original notice of appeal was sufficient,
  the Fourth Circuit held that Parrish’s failure to file a new notice of
  appeal within the reopened appeal period deprived the court of juris-
  diction.
Held: A litigant who files a notice of appeal after the original appeal
 deadline but before the court grants reopening need not file a second
 notice after reopening. The original notice relates forward to the date
 reopening is granted. Pp. 4–13.
    (a) Civil litigants must ordinarily file a notice of appeal within 30
 days after entry of judgment, or 60 days when the United States is a
 party. §§2107(a), (b). In civil cases, the requirement to file a timely
 notice is jurisdictional. Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205, 214. Congress
2                      PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                                   Syllabus

    created two exceptions: Courts may extend the appeal time upon a
    showing of excusable neglect or good cause, and courts may reopen the
    time for appeal when a party entitled to notice does not receive it
    within 21 days of entry. §2107(c). Here, there is no dispute that the
    District Court properly reopened Parrish’s time to appeal. Pp. 4–5.
       (b) Section 2107(c) establishes that a reopened appeal period runs
    for 14 days from “the date of entry of the order reopening the time for
    appeal.” A notice filed after that 14-day period is late, meaning it can
    no longer serve its purpose. Bowles, 551 U. S., at 214. A notice filed
    before reopening is granted, however, is merely early. While the stat-
    ute’s text does not address the jurisdictional consequences of a prema-
    ture filing, Congress legislates against the background of common-law
    principles, which apply unless a contrary statutory purpose is evident.
    See Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino, 501 U. S. 104, 108.
    This Court has long held that premature but adequate notices of ap-
    peal should relate forward to the entry of the document that makes an
    appeal possible. For over a century, the Court has consistently applied
    this principle to avoid dismissing appeals based on mere technicalities
    when “no genuine doubt exists about who is appealing, from what judg-
    ment, and to which appellate court.” Becker v. Montgomery, 532 U. S.
    757, 767–768.
       The practice with regard to premature notices did not change when
    Congress passed the first version of what is now 28 U. S. C. §2107 in
    1948, or when the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure were subse-
    quently promulgated. The text of §2107(c) itself provides no indication
    that Congress sought to “terminate” the longstanding relation-forward
    rule “or disturb its development.” Minerva Surgical, Inc. v. Hologic,
    Inc., 594 U. S. 559, 572. Applying the relation-forward rule, Parrish’s
    notice related forward to the date of the District Court’s reopening or-
    der. Pp. 5–8.
       (c) Counterarguments are unpersuasive. While the word “reopen”
    presumes the appeal period has closed, this merely confirms that Par-
    rish’s notice was premature with respect to the reopened period—it
    does not resolve whether the notice should relate forward. The char-
    acterization of the notice as “late” rather than “premature” fails to rec-
    ognize that there were two proper times to appeal: the original 60-day
    period and the 14-day reopening period. The Fourth Circuit’s concern
    that a single filing cannot serve dual purposes is contradicted by prec-
    edent recognizing that one document can simultaneously function as
    both a notice of appeal and other required filings. See, e.g., Smith v.
    Barry, 502 U. S. 244, 245. Pp. 8–10.
       (d) The Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure support this result.
    Rules 4(a)(2) and 4(a)(4) codify the principle that premature notices
    should relate forward when they do not prejudice opposing parties.
                      Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                       3

                                 Syllabus

  The 1993 amendment eliminating restrictions on relation-forward was
  specifically designed to avoid creating “a trap for an unsuspecting liti-
  gant” and to address the problem that “[m]any litigants, especially pro
  se litigants, fail[ed] to file the second notice of appeal.” Fed. Rule App.
  Proc. 4, 18 U. S. C. App., p. 11. Rule 4(a)(6)’s silence on relation-for-
  ward does not create a negative implication prohibiting it, particularly
  given the Rules’ emphasis on securing “just, speedy, and inexpensive
  determination” of every action or proceeding and disregarding “errors
  and defects that do not affect any party’s substantial rights.” Fed.
  Rules Civ. Proc. 1, 61. So long as Rule 4(a)(6) does not speak to rela-
  tion-forward, the default rule applies. That means Parrish’s appeal
  can go forward under the Federal Rules as well as the statute. Pp. 10–
  13.
74 F. 4th 160, reversed and remanded.

   SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and ALITO, KAGAN, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. JACK-
SON, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS,
J., joined. GORSUCH, J., filed a dissenting opinion.
                        Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 24–275
                                   _________________


 DONTE PARRISH, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
                                 [June 12, 2025]

   JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
   In civil litigation, filing your notice of appeal too late de-
prives the court of appeals of jurisdiction over the appeal.
Litigants who miss the appeal deadline because they do not
timely receive the district court’s decision, however, are not
without recourse. In such circumstances, Congress has au-
thorized courts to reopen the time to appeal. The question
in this case is whether a litigant who files a notice of appeal
before the court grants reopening must file a second notice
after reopening.
   The answer is no. A notice of appeal filed after the origi-
nal deadline but before reopening is late with respect to the
original appeal period, but merely early with respect to the
reopened one. Precedent teaches that a premature notice
of appeal, if otherwise adequate, relates forward to the date
of the order making the appeal possible. So a notice filed
before reopening relates forward to the date reopening is
granted, making a second notice unnecessary. Because the
Fourth Circuit held otherwise, this Court now reverses.
                              I
                             A
  In the winter of 2009, while petitioner Donte Parrish was
2                PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                     Opinion of the Court

incarcerated at the federal prison in Hazelton, West Vir-
ginia, a group of inmates attacked and killed Jimmy Lee
Wilson. An incident report found Parrish partly responsi-
ble. Not long thereafter, Parrish was placed in restrictive,
segregated confinement, where he remained for 23 months.
The reason, Parrish says, was his alleged involvement in
Wilson’s death. Yet Parrish did not receive a hearing to
contest his guilt until August 2015, long after his segre-
gated confinement had ended. Eventually, following a sec-
ond hearing and an appeal, a discipline hearing officer ex-
punged Parrish’s disciplinary record and concluded he had
committed “[n]o prohibited act” during the incident. App.
in No. 20–1766 (CA4), p. 77.
  Parrish filed two administrative tort claims, alleging due
process violations and wrongful confinement. When the
Government rejected those claims, Parrish filed this suit in
Federal District Court, seeking damages for his time in seg-
regated custody. The District Court dismissed the case,
holding that some claims were untimely and others unex-
hausted.
                             B
  The important part, for present purposes, is what hap-
pened next. The District Court entered its judgment dis-
missing the case on March 23, 2020. The next day, Parrish
was released from federal custody and transferred to a state
penitentiary. So when the District Court’s order finally
made it to the federal prison two weeks later, Parrish was
no longer there.
  Parrish ultimately received the opinion and judgment
dismissing his lawsuit three months after the District
Court had issued it. He promptly sent a letter to the court,
explaining that “[d]ue to my being transferred from Federal
to State custody I did not receive this order until June 25,
2020. It is now 7/8/20 and I’m filing this notice of appeal.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 71a. The Fourth Circuit recognized
                     Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                     3

                          Opinion of the Court

that Parrish’s notice of appeal came well after the 60-day
appeal period for suits against the United States, but con-
strued it as a motion to reopen the time to file an appeal
under 28 U. S. C. §2107(c). 827 Fed. Appx. 327 (2020). On
remand, the District Court granted reopening “for fourteen
(14) days following the entry of this Order” and transmitted
the record back to the Fourth Circuit. App. to Pet. for Cert.
61a–62a. Parrish did not file a second notice of appeal.
   Back at the Court of Appeals, the United States indicated
that Parrish’s initial notice of appeal had adequately com-
municated his “intent to seek appellate review,” meaning
(in the Government’s view) that he was “not required to file
a second notice.” Brief for United States in No. 20–1766
(CA4), pp. 10–11 (capitalization and boldface omitted). Par-
rish agreed.
   The Fourth Circuit did not. In the Fourth Circuit’s view,
Parrish should have filed a new notice of appeal after the
District Court reopened the appeal window. Unlike an ex-
tension of the original appeal period, the Fourth Circuit
reasoned, reopening under §2107(c) “provides for a new 14-
day window for filing a notice of appeal, running from the
date of the district court’s order granting the reopening.” 74
F. 4th 160, 165 (2023). Parrish’s first notice was untimely
with respect to the original appeal period and he failed to
file an appeal within the reopened period, so, the court held,
it lacked jurisdiction to hear his case. In dissent, then-Chief
Judge Gregory argued that the reopening order had “vali-
dated [Parrish’s] earlier notice of appeal,” such that no sec-
ond notice was required. Id., at 168. The full Circuit denied
rehearing en banc by a vote of 9 to 6.
   Because the Fourth Circuit’s holding created a split with
at least two other Courts of Appeals,1 this Court granted
——————
  1 See Winters v. Taskila, 88 F. 4th 665, 671 (CA6 2023), and United

States v. Withers, 638 F. 3d 1055, 1061–1062 (CA9 2011), both holding
that a post-reopening notice of appeal is not required to confer appellate
jurisdiction under 28 U. S. C. §2107(c). Other Circuits have adopted the
4                  PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of the Court

certiorari, 604 U. S. ___ (2025), to decide whether a litigant
who files a notice of appeal after the ordinary appeal period
expires must file a second notice after the appeal period is
reopened, Pet. for Cert. i. Parrish and the United States
agree the answer to that question is no, so the Court ap-
pointed Michael Huston as amicus curiae to defend the
judgment below. 604 U. S. ___ (2025). He has ably dis-
charged his responsibilities.
                               II
                               A
    Litigants must ordinarily file a notice of appeal within 30
days “after the entry of ” the relevant “judgment, order[,] or
decree” to secure their right to an appeal. 28 U. S. C.
§2107(a). When the United States is involved as a party, as
it is here, that period is extended to 60 days. §2107(b). In
a civil case, the requirement to file a timely notice of appeal
is jurisdictional. Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205, 214
(2007).
    Recognizing that harsh consequences would result from
unyielding application of these deadlines, Congress crafted
two exceptions. First, any time during the appeal period,
or within 30 days after its expiration, the district court may
“extend the time for appeal upon a showing of excusable ne-
glect or good cause.” §2107(c). Second, when “a party enti-
tled to notice” of a decision “d[oes] not receive such notice
. . . within 21 days of [the decision’s] entry,” the district
court may “reopen the time for appeal for a period of 14 days
from the date of entry of the [reopening] order,” if no party
would be prejudiced by the reopening. Ibid. To take ad-
vantage of the latter provision, a litigant must file a motion
to reopen “within 180 days after entry of the judgment or
——————
same approach in unpublished opinions. See Holden v. Attorney Gen. of
N. J., 2023 WL 8798084, *1, n. 4 (CA3, Dec. 20, 2023); Norwood v. East
Allen Cty. Schools, 825 Fed. Appx. 383, 386–387 (CA7 2020); United
States v. Marshall, 1998 WL 864012, *2 (CA10, Dec. 14, 1998).
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            5

                      Opinion of the Court

order or within 14 days after” receiving it, “whichever is
earlier.” Ibid.
   Here, all agree, the District Court properly reopened Par-
rish’s time to appeal because Parrish filed his notice within
14 days of receiving the judgment dismissing his case, and
no prejudice would result from reopening. The question is
whether Parrish’s subsequent failure to file a second notice
of appeal deprived the Fourth Circuit of appellate jurisdic-
tion.
                               B
  Because §2107(c) sets the jurisdictional requirements re-
lated to reopening, the analysis begins there. The statute’s
text makes clear that a reopened appeal period does not
begin until “the date of entry of the order reopening the
time for appeal,” and that it thereafter runs “for a period of
14 days.” A notice filed after that 14-day period is late,
meaning, this Court has held, that it can no longer serve its
purpose. Bowles, 551 U. S., at 214. A notice filed before
reopening is granted, however, is merely early. And while
the statute’s text makes clear that a pre-reopening notice
would be early, it says nothing about whether such prema-
turity should be given jurisdictional consequences.
  Congress legislates, however, “against a background of
common-law adjudicatory principles,” and it expects those
principles to apply “except ‘when a statutory purpose to the
contrary is evident.’ ” Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. So-
limino, 501 U. S. 104, 108 (1991) (quoting Isbrandtsen Co.
v. Johnson, 343 U. S. 779, 783 (1952)). When Congress
passed the provision allowing reopening of the appeal pe-
riod in 1991, then, it would have expected background rules
governing early notices of appeal to continue to apply. 501
U. S., at 108. Here, those rules make clear that Parrish
should have been able to proceed with his appeal.
  This Court has long emphasized that “ ‘the purpose of
pleading is to facilitate a proper decision on the merits.’ ”
6                 PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                       Opinion of the Court

Foman v. Davis, 371 U. S. 178, 182 (1962). Accordingly,
“imperfections in noticing an appeal should not be fatal
where no genuine doubt exists about who is appealing, from
what judgment, to which appellate court.” Becker v. Mont-
gomery, 532 U. S. 757, 767–768 (2001) (citing Smith v.
Barry, 502 U. S. 244, 248–249 (1992)). Consistent with that
core principle, “the technical defect of prematurity . . .
should not be allowed to extinguish an otherwise proper ap-
peal.” FirsTier Mortgage Co. v. Investors Mortgage Ins. Co.,
498 U. S. 269, 273 (1991). Instead, an adequate but prem-
ature notice of appeal “relates forward to the entry of the
document that renders an appeal possible.” 16A C. Wright,
A. Miller, E. Cooper, & C. Struve, Federal Practice and Pro-
cedure §3950.5, p. 453 (5th ed. 2019) (reviewing the Cir-
cuits’ application of that rule).
   This Court has adhered to that principle for well over a
century. In Ex parte Roberts, 15 Wall. 384 (1873), the Court
held that a defendant who filed near-simultaneous motions
for a new trial and “for the allowance of an appeal” could
have his appeal heard after the district court ruled on the
new trial motion. Id., at 385–386. The Court reaffirmed
that holding in Luckenbach S. S. Co. v. United States, 272
U. S. 533 (1926), explaining that a notice of appeal filed be-
fore disposition of a new-trial motion was “premature” but
“not a nullity.” Id., at 535. More than two decades later, a
unanimous Court summarily reversed the Ninth Circuit for
dismissing an appeal in a criminal case where the defend-
ant had filed his notice after the court announced his sen-
tence but before the entry of judgment. Lemke v. United
States, 346 U. S. 325 (1953) (per curiam).
   Congress passed the first version of what is now
28 U. S. C. §2107 in 1948, setting the 30- and 60-day time-
lines for civil appeals that still exist today. See 62 Stat. 963.
That enactment did not change the practice with regard to
premature notices. In Foman, this Court held (again unan-
imously) that the combination of a timely but incomplete
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             7

                      Opinion of the Court

notice of appeal and a premature but complete notice suf-
ficed to convey appellate jurisdiction. 371 U. S., at 181. In
the process, the Court emphasized that “decisions on the
merits” ought not be “avoided on the basis of . . . mere tech-
nicalities.” Ibid. More recently, after promulgation of the
first Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, we held that an
appeal filed after a ruling from the bench but before the en-
try of judgment was effective, notwithstanding its prema-
turity. FirsTier, 498 U. S., at 274. That holding, the Court
explained, reflected the “general practice in the courts of
appeals of deeming certain premature notices of appeal ef-
fective.” Id., at 273, 275–276 (citing as examples Ruby v.
Secretary of Navy, 365 F. 2d 385 (CA9 1966) and Firchau v.
Diamond Nat. Corp., 345 F. 2d 269 (CA9 1965)); see gener-
ally 16A Wright, Federal Practice and Procedure §3950.5
(collecting cases).
   The text of §2107(c), enacted on the heels of FirsTier, pro-
vides no indication that Congress sought to “terminate” the
longstanding relation-forward rule “or disturb its develop-
ment.” Minerva Surgical, Inc. v. Hologic, Inc., 594 U. S.
559, 572 (2021). It simply does not speak to the issue. The
natural inference, therefore, is that Congress expected the
relation-forward principle to apply. Ibid.
   A contrary result would not only “subvert congressional
design,” ibid., it would also make little sense. The purpose
of a notice of appeal (as its moniker suggests) is to provide
opposing parties and the court with notice of one’s intent to
appeal. That is why “the notice afforded by a document . . .
determines the document’s sufficiency as a notice of ap-
peal.” Smith, 502 U. S., at 248. So long as “no genuine
doubt exists about who is appealing, from what judgment,
to which appellate court,” Becker, 532 U. S., at 767–768,
there is little value and significant harm in dismissing ap-
peals on the basis of prematurity alone.
   This case illustrates the point. As the Government ad-
mits, it was perfectly clear after Parrish’s first notice that
8                    PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

he intended to appeal his case’s dismissal. Sending another
notice would amount to nothing more than “ ‘empty paper
shuffling.’ ” Hinton v. Elwood, 997 F. 2d 774, 778 (CA10
1993). Yet on account of that procedural nicety, the Fourth
Circuit would have deprived Parrish of his right to an ap-
peal. Absent clear congressional direction to the contrary,
“[i]t is too late in the day . . . for decisions on the merits to
be avoided on the basis of such mere technicalities” as
prematurity. Foman, 371 U. S., at 181.2
   Applying the default relation-forward rule, Parrish’s sin-
gle notice of appeal conveyed appellate jurisdiction to the
Fourth Circuit. True, with respect to the original appeal
window, the notice came too late. With respect to the 14-
day reopening period, however, Parrish’s notice was merely
premature. Parrish’s filing otherwise provided ample no-
tice to all involved. Accordingly, his notice related forward
to the date of the District Court’s reopening order.
                              C
   Amicus’s counterarguments do not persuade. The word
“reopen,” he argues, “presumes that the period to appeal
has already closed before the motion is filed.” Brief for
Court-Appointed Amicus Curiae 14. It follows that the 14-
day appeals period following reopening “is the only time
during which an appeal can be commenced.” Ibid. Because
Parrish’s notice came before that time, the argument goes,
it should be given no effect.
——————
   2 In the context of reopening, requiring pro se litigants to refile their

appeal after the district court has told them their delay in appealing has
been excused is especially likely to lead to confusion. Given the brevity
of the reopening period, moreover, this rule would leave many incarcer-
ated litigants without any means to take advantage of reopening. Dis-
trict court decisions are slow to reach inmates at the best of times. In
this case, the judgment sent by certified mail to the federal prison where
Parrish had been incarcerated took 15 days to arrive there. Had the re-
opening order been delivered at the same speed, the reopened appeal pe-
riod would have been over before the order granting it arrived.
                 Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            9

                     Opinion of the Court

   The problem with this argument is that it establishes
only that Parrish’s notice of appeal came too early with re-
spect to the reopened appeals period. Yet that much was
never in dispute. The question, rather, is whether Parrish’s
premature notice related forward to the entry of the reopen-
ing order. Simply showing that the notice came too early
merely restates the question; it does not answer it.
   Perhaps sensing this problem, amicus attempts to char-
acterize Parrish’s notice as tardy rather than premature.
According to amicus, “premature” means “ ‘done before the
usual, proper, or appointed time,’ ” and (he says) here the
appointed time for appealing “was within 60 days after the
judgment.” Id., at 26 (quoting 12 Oxford English Dictionary
362 (2d ed. 1989)). Because Parrish “filed his only notice of
appeal after that window closed,” amicus argues, the notice
was late, not early. Brief for Court-Appointed Amicus Cu-
riae 26. That argument simply elides that there were two
“proper” times to appeal here, not one: The original 60-day
period, and the 14-day reopening. Parrish’s notice was late
only with respect to the former.
   Driving the Fourth Circuit’s analysis, meanwhile, was
the idea that, once Parrish’s filing had been construed as a
motion to reopen, it could not simultaneously retain its
function as a notice of appeal. 74 F. 4th, at 163 (“[B]ecause
Parrish’s earlier filing has already been construed” as a mo-
tion to reopen, “we cannot now reconstrue it to be simulta-
neously both the motion that must precede a district court’s
reopening order and the notice that must follow after the
order is granted”). This Court has repeatedly emphasized,
however, that a single filing can serve multiple purposes in
just such fashion. For example, one filing can serve simul-
taneously as the principal merits brief and the notice of ap-
peal that would ordinarily precede it. Smith, 502 U. S., at
245. Similarly, one filing can serve as a notice of appeal as
well as an antecedent request for certificate of appealabil-
ity. See Slack v. McDaniel, 529 U. S. 473, 483 (2000).
10                   PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

There is no reason why Parrish’s filing could not similarly
serve as both a notice of appeal and a request for reopening.
  In sum, §2107(c) did not deprive the Fourth Circuit of ap-
pellate jurisdiction over Parrish’s appeal.3
                              III
   The Rules of Appellate Procedure do not bar Parrish’s ap-
peal, either. To the contrary, they are entirely consistent
with the relation-forward principle.
   As this Court has recognized, Rules 4(a)(2) and 4(a)(4)
“codify” the general understanding that “certain premature
notices do not prejudice the appellee and that the technical
defect of prematurity therefore should not be allowed to ex-
tinguish an otherwise proper appeal.” FirsTier, 498 U. S.,
at 273. Thus, Rule 4(a)(2) explains that a notice filed “after
the court announces a decision or order,” but “before the en-
try of the judgment or order,” relates forward to the date
the judgment is entered.4 And Rule 4(a)(4) explains that, if
a notice of appeal is filed before the district court has dis-
posed of certain specified post-trial motions, the notice of
appeal will relate forward to the date of the “order disposing
of the last such” motion.
   A prior iteration of Rule 4(a)(4) prohibited relation for-
ward in certain limited contexts, requiring duplicative no-
tices of appeal. The result: “Many litigants, especially

——————
   3 The dissent would have dismissed this case as improvidently granted

because, in its view, the Rules Committee could have resolved the ques-
tion presented. Post, at 1 (opinion of GORSUCH, J.). Yet “ ‘[it] is axiomatic
that the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure do not create or withdraw fed-
eral jurisdiction.’ ” Hamer v. Neighborhood Housing Servs. of Chicago,
583 U. S. 17, 19 (2017). Accordingly, the Rules Committee could not
change the Fourth Circuit’s jurisdictional holding about §2107(c).
   4 The same rule applies in criminal appeals. Rule 4(b)(2), which codi-

fies this Court’s holding in Lemke v. United States, 346 U. S. 325 (1953)
(per curiam), provides that “[a] notice of appeal filed after the court an-
nounces a decision, sentence, or order—but before the entry of the judg-
ment or order—is treated as filed on the date of and after the entry”).
                      Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)                     11

                           Opinion of the Court

pro se litigants, fail[ed] to file the second notice of appeal.”
Fed. Rule App. Proc. 4, 18 U. S. C. App., p. 11 (citing Aver-
hart v. Arrendondo, 773 F. 2d 919 (CA7 1985), and Harcon
Barge Co. v. D & G Boat Rentals, Inc., 746 F. 2d 278 (CA5
1984)). So in 1993, the Rules Committee amended Rule 4
to delete its restrictions on the relation-forward principle,
concluding they “created a trap for an unsuspecting litigant
who files a notice of appeal before a posttrial motion, or
while a posttrial motion is pending.” 18 U. S. C. App., at
11.
    Today, nothing in the Rules suggests any intent to abro-
gate the relation-forward of premature notices of appeal.
To the contrary, “the spirit of the Federal Rules” is that “de-
cisions on the merits [should not] be avoided on the basis of
. . . mere technicalities.” Foman, 371 U. S., at 181. Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 1 provides that the Rules “should be
construed, administered, and employed by the court and
the parties to secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive de-
termination of every action and proceeding.” Thus, courts
are directed to “disregard all errors and defects that do not
affect any party’s substantial rights.” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc.
61. When a premature notice of appeal makes clear “who is
appealing, from what judgment, to which appellate court,”
Becker, 532 U. S., at 767–768, its relation forward to entry
of the document formally enabling the appeal does not af-
fect substantial rights.5 By contrast, as the Committee’s
prior experiment with a contrary Rule illustrated, see su-
pra, at 10 and this page above, requiring a second notice of


——————
   5 That principle explains as well why the Rules do not permit “a notice

of appeal from a clearly interlocutory decision—such as a discovery rul-
ing or a sanction order under Rule 11 . . . — to serve as a notice of appeal
from the final judgment.” FirsTier Mortgage Co. v. Investors Mortgage
Ins. Co., 498 U. S. 269, 276 (1991). A notice so far removed from the
relevant appealable decision would not make clear “from what judgment”
the appellant intends to seek relief. Becker, 532 U. S., at 767.
12                   PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

                           Opinion of the Court

appeal substantially undermines the rights of unsophisti-
cated litigants.
   Amicus points out that Rules 4(a)(2) and 4(a)(4) expressly
permit relation forward, while Rule 4(a)(6), governing reo-
pening, is silent on the issue. By way of negative implica-
tion, amicus says, it follows that relation forward is not per-
mitted in the context of reopening. “ ‘The force of any
negative implication, however, depends on context.’ ”
NLRB v. SW General, Inc., 580 U. S. 288, 302 (2017) (quot-
ing Marx v. General Revenue Corp., 568 U. S. 371, 381
(2013)). Here that context includes not only the background
relation-forward principle but also the Rules’ own emphasis
on function over form. Foman, 371 U. S., at 181. Against
that backdrop it is unlikely that the Rules Committee
sought impliedly to prohibit relation forward in Rule 4(a)(6)
by allowing it in Rules 4(a)(2) and 4(a)(4), neither of which
have anything to do with reopening.6 Indeed, this Court
has previously recognized that the Rules’ codification of a
pre-existing practice in one context need not imply that all
other applications are foreclosed. See Scarborough v. Prin-
cipi, 541 U. S. 401, 417–418 (2004).
   Amicus’s reading is made particularly implausible by the
fact that relation forward of a postjudgment notice preced-
ing a reopening order could not prejudice the other parties.
To reopen the appeals period, a would-be appellant must
file either a request to reopen, or (as here) a notice of appeal
that is construed as such a request. Assuming the filings
are otherwise adequate, either one would put the other side
on notice of the filer’s intent to appeal. Other parties thus
have nothing to gain from being served a second notice after
reopening is granted.
——————
   6 To be sure, that Rule 4(a)(4) specifically enumerates certain specified

post-trial motions may raise a negative inference that relation forward
is not permitted, under the Rules, with respect to other post-trial mo-
tions. But any such inference does not extend to the entirely distinct
context of Rule 4(a)(6) reopening.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)           13

                      Opinion of the Court

   Finally, the Rules Committee knows how to restrict rela-
tion forward when it wants to do so. Recall that Rule 4(a)(4)
codifies this Court’s holdings that a notice of appeal filed
alongside a post-trial motion will relate forward to the entry
of an order disposing of the post-trial motion. See supra, at
9. Rule 4(a)(4)(B)(ii) carves out a narrow exception: Some-
one who wishes to appeal not only the original judgment,
but also the substance of an order resolving the post-trial
motion, “must file a notice of appeal, or an amended notice
of appeal,” after “the entry of the order disposing” of that
motion. That makes sense. An amended notice of appeal
in those circumstances informs the opposing party that the
appeal will cover more than just the original judgment. So
in the limited circumstance where the Rules require it, the
second notice serves a real purpose.
   If the Rules Committee believes a second notice could be
similarly useful in the context of reopening, it remains free
to recommend a change. Indeed, the Committee is appar-
ently considering that issue presently. So long as Rule
4(a)(6) does not speak to relation forward, however, the de-
fault rule applies. That means Parrish’s appeal can go for-
ward under the Rules as well as the statute.
                         *    *     *
  When a district court grants reopening to a litigant who
has already filed a notice making his intent to appeal clear,
no second notice of appeal is required. Instead, the original
notice relates forward to the date reopening is granted.
Donte Parrish’s notice of appeal thus did all that was re-
quired of it. The judgment of the Fourth Circuit is reversed,
and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
                                             It is so ordered.
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

               JACKSON, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 24–275
                          _________________


 DONTE PARRISH, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
                         [June 12, 2025]

   JUSTICE JACKSON, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
concurring in the judgment.
   As the Court explains, Donte Parrish submitted a late no-
tice of appeal, which the Fourth Circuit construed as a “mo-
tion to reopen” the time to appeal and the District Court
subsequently granted. I agree with the Court’s conclusion
that Parrish did not need to do anything more in order for
his notice of appeal to be treated as timely. I write sepa-
rately to explain why, in my view, it is unnecessary to resort
to ripening or relation-forward principles to reach that re-
sult.
   All parties agree that the statutory deadline for filing a
notice of appeal had passed when Parrish’s notice arrived
at the courthouse. There is also no dispute that, because
the deadline to file a notice of appeal is jurisdictional, Par-
rish’s tardiness could not have been waived or excused un-
less a provision of law extended the period during which he
could file the notice. Luckily for Parrish, the relevant stat-
ute in this case contains such a provision: Section 2107(c) of
Title 28 permits a district court to “reopen the time for ap-
peal for a period of 14 days from the date of entry of the
[reopening] order” if certain conditions are met. See
§2107(c) (allowing reopening if the movant did not receive
notice of the judgment within 21 days of its issuance; he
sought reopening within 14 days of notice or 180 days of
2                PARRISH v. UNITED STATES

               JACKSON, J., concurring in judgment

judgment, whichever is earlier; and no party would be prej-
udiced by reopening); see also ante, at 4–5. After the Fourth
Circuit construed Parrish’s notice as a motion to reopen un-
der this provision, the District Court properly concluded
that Parrish met the statutory criteria and reopened the
window in which Parrish could file.
   As a practical matter, litigants file motions like this
one—seeking to reopen or extend a deadline—every day in
federal district court. When they do so, they often attach to
their motion the (late) document they hope to receive per-
mission to file. For example, when a party has missed a
filing deadline, they frequently ask for an extension of time
to file the substantive document they had hoped to submit.
The motion they submit usually explains or seeks to justify
the delay, and a proposed order extending the relevant
deadline (ready for the court’s signature) is often included.
The proposed substantive filing is also appended to that
packet—which the district court then dockets, if it grants
the extension.
   Because Parrish’s filing was effectively submitted in this
manner, to me, the court that received it should have han-
dled it in that way. Having construed Parrish’s notice of
appeal as a motion to reopen, the court should have done
what district courts do every day in our federal system
when such a motion is granted: docket the proposed sub-
stantive filing—here, the notice of appeal. With the notice
of appeal thus docketed, the court should have then trans-
ferred the case to the Court of Appeals for further proceed-
ings.
   This way of conceptualizing Parrish’s filing does not re-
quire reliance on principles of ripening or relation forward.
It also makes sense, because Parrish filed what the court
construed as a “motion to reopen” for the purpose of allow-
ing that very document (the notice of appeal) to be filed. It
would indeed be strange to reopen a case because the liti-
gant has filed a proposed notice of appeal, but then fail to
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            3

               JACKSON, J., concurring in judgment

treat that filing as what the movant proposes it to be: a no-
tice of appeal accepted by the court as timely filed.
   In short, when a late litigant submits a proposed filing
along with a motion that asks the court to accept it, the sub-
stantive document does not come “too early.” Ante, at 9.
Rather, it comes contingent upon the court’s granting the
accompanying motion, with an understanding that, if the
motion is granted, the filing will be docketed.
   This reasoning, of course, might not apply in other factual
circumstances, such as when a would-be appellant files a
notice of appeal late and then, days later, submits a sepa-
rate motion to reopen; in that case, a court may well need
to establish whether the earlier filed notice of appeal “re-
lates forward” upon the granting of the separate motion to
reopen. But, here, the “motion to reopen” and the notice of
appeal were one and the same, making the factual basis for
our rule of decision much simpler. Parrish’s proposed no-
tice of appeal should have been docketed as timely filed
upon the District Court’s granting of his “motion to reopen.”
                  Cite as: 605 U. S. ____ (2025)            1

                     GORSUCH, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                          _________________

                           No. 24–275
                          _________________


 DONTE PARRISH, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
                         [June 12, 2025]

   JUSTICE GORSUCH, dissenting.
   Respectfully, I would have dismissed this case as improv-
idently granted. The Advisory Committee on Appellate
Rules has already launched a study to consider whether
changes to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(6) may
be warranted to treat premature notices of appeal as relat-
ing forward to the first day of the 14-day window 28 U. S. C.
§2107(c) prescribes. Brief in Opposition 16; see also Winters
v. Taskila, 88 F. 4th 665, 671–672 (CA6 2023). Surely, too,
a change to the rules could have solved the problem pre-
sented by this case. Contra, ante, at 10, n. 3. Even if
§2107(c) requires a notice to be filed during a certain win-
dow, the Rules Committee could provide that a premature
notice shall be treated as filed at a later date. Already, the
Committee has done exactly that in other appellate rules,
including Rules 4(a)(2) and 4(a)(4). See Advisory Commit-
tee’s Notes on 1979 Amendments, 28 U. S. C. App., p. 10.
Rather than take up problems the Rules Committee can
solve and has announced its interest in solving—and, in do-
ing so, risk the possibility that the Committee (understand-
ably) may suspend its own activities and delay their resolu-
tion—I believe the wiser and more efficient course is to let
the Committee get on with its work. That body is charged
with “review[ing] issues of precisely this sort.” Winters, 88
F. 4th, at 672; see also Kemp v. United States, 596 U. S. 528,
540–542 (2022) (GORSUCH, J., dissenting).