(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2023                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

                     BROWN v. UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                  THE THIRD CIRCUIT

  No. 22–6389. Argued November 27, 2023—Decided May 23, 2024*
These cases concern the application of the Armed Career Criminal Act to
  state drug convictions that occurred before recent technical amend-
  ments to the federal drug schedules. ACCA imposes a 15-year manda-
  tory minimum sentence on defendants who are convicted for the illegal
  possession of a firearm and who have a criminal history thought to
  demonstrate a propensity for violence. As relevant here, a defendant
  with “three previous convictions” for “a serious drug offense” qualifies
  for ACCA’s enhanced sentencing. 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1). For a state
  crime to qualify as a “serious drug offense,” it must carry a maximum
  sentence of at least 10 years’ imprisonment, and it must “involv[e] . . .
  a controlled substance . . . as defined in section 102 of the Controlled
  Substances Act.” §§924(e)(1), (2)(A)(ii).
     Under the categorical approach, a state drug offense counts as an
  ACCA predicate only if the State’s definition of the drug in question
  “matche[s]” the definition under federal law. Shular v. United States,
  589 U. S. 154, 158. The question presented is whether a state crime
  constitutes a “serious drug offense” if it involved a drug that was on
  the federal schedules when the defendant possessed or trafficked in it
  but was later removed.
     Petitioners Justin Rashaad Brown and Eugene Jackson were sepa-
  rately convicted of the federal crime of possession of a firearm by a
  convicted felon in violation of §922(g)(1). In both cases, an ACCA en-
  hancement was recommended based on prior state felony drug convic-
  tions. And both defendants argued that their prior convictions did not
  qualify as “serious drug offense[ s].”
——————
  * Together with No. 22–6640, Jackson v. United States, on certiorari to
the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit.
2                      BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                                  Syllabus

       Brown’s presentence report identified several Pennsylvania drug
    convictions, including four convictions for possessing marijuana with
    intent to distribute. At the time of Brown’s marijuana convictions, the
    federal and Pennsylvania law definitions of marijuana matched. But
    while Brown’s federal §922(g)(1) charge was pending, Congress modi-
    fied the federal definition of marijuana. Because the federal and state
    definitions did not fully match when Brown was sentenced, Brown ar-
    gued that his marijuana convictions no longer qualified as “serious
    drug offense[s]” for purposes of the ACCA sentencing enhancement.
       Jackson’s presentence report identified several prior Florida convic-
    tions, including convictions in 1998 and 2004 for possession and distri-
    bution of cocaine. In 2015, the Federal Government amended the fed-
    eral definition of cocaine, so the federal and Florida definitions no
    longer matched when Jackson committed his §922(g)(1) offense. Like
    Brown, Jackson argued that these prior convictions no longer qualified
    as “serious drug offense[s].” In both cases, the District Courts disa-
    greed and sentenced petitioners to enhanced sentences, and the re-
    spective appellate courts ultimately affirmed.
Held: A state drug conviction counts as an ACCA predicate if it involved
 a drug on the federal schedules at the time of that offense. Pp. 4–
 19.
    (a) The parties propose three different answers to the question
 whether the federal and state definitions of a drug must match when
 the state crime is committed or at some later point in time. The Gov-
 ernment argues that a prior state drug conviction qualifies if the fed-
 eral and state definitions of the relevant drug matched when the de-
 fendant committed the state crime. Jackson argues instead that the
 definitions must match when the defendant violates the federal felon-
 in-possession statute. Finally, Brown contends that the definitions
 must match when the defendant is sentenced for the federal felon-in-
 possession offense. Pp. 4–7.
    (b) Precedent and statutory context support the Government’s inter-
 pretation. ACCA gauges what a defendant’s “history of criminal activ-
 ity” says about his or her “culpability and dangerousness.” McNeill v.
 United States, 563 U. S. 816, 823. In previous cases, the Court has
 held that ACCA requires sentencing courts to examine the law as it
 was when the defendant violated it. This “backward-looking” ap-
 proach, id., at 820, supports the Government’s interpretation. And the
 plain language of the statute points to the same conclusion. Section
 924(e)(2)(A)(i), which immediately precedes the provision at issue, de-
 fines a “serious drug offense” to include, among other things, “of-
 fense[s] under the Controlled Substances Act.” A later change in a
 federal drug schedule does not change the fact that an offense “under
                    Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                       3

                               Syllabus

the [CSA]” is a “serious drug offense.” The Government’s interpreta-
tion would treat state offenses “involving . . . a controlled substance (as
defined in [the CSA])” like those federal offenses “under the [CSA].”
Petitioners’ interpretations, by contrast, would treat those federal and
state offenses differently, i.e., the federal offense would remain an
ACCA predicate, but the state offense would not. Pp. 7–9.
   (c) The Government’s interpretation also best fulfills ACCA’s statu-
tory objectives. In Congress’s view, defendants who have repeatedly
committed ACCA predicate offenses are “especially likely to inflict
grave harm when in possession of a firearm,” so ACCA imposes a
higher punishment when they do so. Wooden v. United States, 595
U. S. 360, 375. Because a defendant’s “history of criminal activity”
does not “cease to exist” merely because the crime was later redefined,
McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823, it makes sense to ask whether a prior of-
fense met ACCA’s definition of seriousness at the time it was commit-
ted. Brown’s and Jackson’s contrary arguments misunderstand the
theory on which ACCA is based. A prior drug conviction for an offense
punishable by 10 years’ imprisonment augurs a risk of future danger-
ousness even if the drug is no longer considered dangerous. Indeed, in
McNeill, the Court found “absurd” petitioner’s argument that a later
reduction in the maximum sentence for his offense reflected a legisla-
tive judgment that his prior offense was less serious than previously
thought. Id., at 822. The “subsequent chang[e] in state law” did not
“erase [the] earlier conviction.” Id., at 823. And it was the fact of that
earlier conviction—not the legislature’s subsequent judgment—that
ACCA was concerned with, because that fact “demonstrate[d]” the de-
fendant’s “culpability and dangerousness.” Ibid. Pp. 9–12.
   (d) Petitioners various other arguments are unpersuasive. Pp. 12–
19.
      (1) Relying on the so-called reference canon, Jackson claims that
ACCA “incorporates [the] schedules . . . ‘as [they] exis[t] whenever a
question under [ACCA] arises.’ ” Brief of Petitioner Jackson 32. The
reference canon provides that a statutory reference to a “general sub-
ject” incorporates “the law on that subject as it exists whenever a ques-
tion under the statute arises.” Jam v. International Finance Corp.,
586 U. S. 199, 209 (emphasis added). But a reference “to another stat-
ute by specific title or section number”—such as ACCA’s reference to
21 U. S. C. §802—“in effect cuts and pastes the referenced statute as
it existed when the referring statute was enacted.” Ibid. Even assum-
ing that there may be contexts in which references to specific statutory
provisions may be considered general, it is hard to see the phrase “as
defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act” as anything
but a specific reference. Jackson’s alternative argument—that his
reading is required by the “settled legal principle” that “the law that
4                      BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                                   Syllabus

    sets the penalty for a federal crime is the law in place when the crime
    was committed”—simply begs the question what §924(e)(2)(a)(ii)
    means. Pp. 12–14.
         (2) Brown suggests that present-tense language in ACCA’s defini-
    tion of a “serious drug crime”—language such as “involving” and “as
    defined in”—indicates a present-day focus requiring courts to look to
    the drug schedules in effect at the time of federal sentencing. The
    Court rejected that approach in McNeill, holding that ACCA requires
    a historical inquiry into the state law at the time of that prior offense
    and that “[u]se of the present tense . . . did not suggest otherwise.” 563
    U. S., at 820. Brown also claims that his reading is required by United
    States v. Schooner Peggy, 1 Cranch 103, 110, which says that when the
    law changes while a case is in progress, the case must be decided under
    the new law. But §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) has not changed at any point in the
    litigation. Pp. 15–17.
         (3) Petitioners’ additional arguments do not persuade. Petitioners
    assert that this Court’s interpretation is underinclusive because it
    would preclude ACCA enhancements for state offenses involving drugs
    added to the federal lists only after the state crimes were committed.
    But none of the parties’ interpretations captures all cases involving
    career criminals. Petitioners next suggest that the Government’s in-
    terpretation is absurd because it would exclude all state drug convic-
    tions before the CSA’s enactment in 1970. But there are reasons Con-
    gress might have chosen not to court either federal or state drug
    convictions that occurred before 1970. Petitioners also argue that the
    Government’s interpretation would unduly burden courts and defend-
    ants by requiring them to undertake the laborious task of digging up
    old federal drug schedules and comparing those to the state laws the
    defendants violated, but petitioners overstate the difficulty of this
    task. Finally, petitioners contend that the rule of lenity counsels in
    favor of their interpretations. But lenity applies only if a statute re-
    mains grievously ambiguous, and here context, precedent, and statu-
    tory design adequately show “ ‘what Congress intended.’ ” United
    States v. Castleman, 572 U. S. 157, 173. Pp 17–19.
No. 22–6389, 47 F. 4th 147, and No. 22–6640, 55 F. 4th 846, affirmed.

  ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and THOMAS, SOTOMAYOR, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. JACK-
SON, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KAGAN, J., joined, and in
which GORSUCH, J., joined as to Parts I, II, and III.
                        Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                         Nos. 22–6389 and 22–6640
                                   _________________


      JUSTIN RASHAAD BROWN, PETITIONER
22–6389               v.
                UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

              EUGENE JACKSON, PETITIONER
22–6640                   v.
                    UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
          APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
                                 [May 23, 2024]

   JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
   These cases concern the application of the Armed Career
Criminal Act (ACCA) to state drug convictions that oc-
curred before recent technical amendments to the federal
drug schedules. ACCA imposes a 15-year mandatory mini-
mum sentence on defendants who are convicted for the ille-
gal possession of a firearm and have a criminal history that
is thought to demonstrate a propensity for violence. These
defendants are subject to ACCA’s enhanced penalty if,
among other things, they have “three previous convictions”
for “a serious drug offense.” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1). For a
state crime to qualify as a “serious drug offense,” it must
carry a maximum sentence of at least 10 years’ imprison-
ment, and it must “involv[e] . . . a controlled substance . . .
as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act”
2                 BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

(CSA). §§924(e)(1), (2)(A)(ii). The CSA, in turn, includes
five schedules of controlled substances and provides that
these schedules must be updated each year by the Attorney
General. 84 Stat. 1245, 1247, 21 U. S. C. §§811, 812.
   The two cases now before us present the question
whether a state crime constitutes a “serious drug offense” if
it involved a drug that was on the federal schedules when
the defendant possessed or trafficked in it but was later re-
moved. We hold that such an offense qualifies.
                                I
                                A
   In 2016, Justin Rashaad Brown sold cocaine to police of-
ficers in a series of controlled buys. The officers conducted
two warrant-authorized searches of Brown’s home, where
they discovered cocaine and a loaded .38-caliber revolver.
In 2018, a federal grand jury returned an indictment charg-
ing Brown with several drug offenses, as well as possession
of a firearm by a convicted felon in violation of 18 U. S. C.
§922(g)(1). Brown pleaded guilty in 2019 and was sen-
tenced two years later.
   At sentencing, the probation office recommended that
Brown receive ACCA’s mandatory minimum sentence be-
cause he had four prior Pennsylvania convictions for pos-
sessing marijuana with intent to distribute between 2009
and 2014, as well as one Pennsylvania conviction for dis-
tributing cocaine in 2008. Brown disputed this interpreta-
tion of ACCA and argued that his marijuana convictions did
not “involv[e] . . . a controlled substance . . . as defined in
[the CSA].” §924(e)(2)(A)(ii).
   A state drug offense counts as an ACCA predicate only if
the State’s definition of the drug in question “matche[s]” the
definition under federal law. Shular v. United States, 589
U. S. 154, 158 (2020). When Brown was convicted for pos-
sessing marijuana, both federal and Pennsylvania law de-
fined marijuana to include “all parts of the plant Cannabis
                    Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                   3

                         Opinion of the Court

sativa L.,” so the definitions were a categorical match. 21
U. S. C. §802(16) (2006 ed.); Pa. Stat. Ann., Tit. 35, §780–
102(b) (Purdon Cum. Supp. 2012) (defining marijuana to in-
clude “all forms, species and/or varieties of the genus Can-
nabis sativa L.”). But while Brown’s federal charge was
pending, Congress enacted the Agriculture Improvement
Act of 2018, which exempted some hemp, a variety of Can-
nabis sativa L., from the federal definition of marijuana.
Pub. L. 115–334, §12619(a)(2), 132 Stat. 5018.1 Because the
federal and state definitions did not fully match when
Brown was sentenced, he argued that his marijuana convic-
tions no longer qualified as “serious drug offense[s].”
   The District Court disagreed and sentenced him under
ACCA, and the Third Circuit affirmed. It concluded that
the 2018 amendment did not apply retroactively to federal
offenses committed before its effective date. Under the
Third Circuit’s view, Brown was “properly subject to . . .
ACCA’s enhanced penalties” because he violated §922(g)
when the federal and state definitions of marijuana were a
categorical match. 47 F. 4th 147, 153, 155 (2022).
                            B
   In 2017, Eugene Jackson noticed a police car arriving at
the Sparkle Food Market to execute an unrelated search
warrant, and he responded by fleeing and discarding a
loaded .45-caliber pistol. Officers eventually identified
Jackson as the gun’s owner, and in 2019, he was charged
with possession of a firearm by a convicted felon. He
pleaded guilty and was sentenced in 2021.
   Jackson’s presentence report identified several prior
Florida convictions as ACCA predicates, including convic-
tions in 1998 and 2004 for possession and distribution of

——————
  1 Hemp is exempted if it contains less than 0.3% THC (tetrahydrocan-

nabinol), the main psychoactive constituent of cannabis. See 7 U. S. C.
§1639o; 21 U. S. C. §802(16).
4                 BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

cocaine. But Jackson, like Brown, claimed that these con-
victions were not for “serious drug offense[s].” When those
crimes were committed, the Federal Government and Flor-
ida defined cocaine the same way. 21 U. S. C. §812(c),
Schedule II, (a)(4); Fla. Stat. §§893.03(2)(a)(4), 893.13(1)
(1998). But in 2015, the Federal Government legalized a
radioactive cocaine derivative called [123I]ioflupane that is
the active pharmaceutical ingredient in a drug used to di-
agnose patients who are suspected to have Parkinson’s dis-
ease. See Schedules of Controlled Substances: Removal of
[123I]Ioflupane From Schedule II of the Controlled Sub-
stances Act, 80 Fed. Reg. 54717. So when Jackson commit-
ted his federal offense, the federal and Florida definitions
were no longer a categorical match.
   The District Court found that Jackson’s prior convictions
qualified as serious drug offenses and sentenced him to
ACCA’s mandatory minimum. On appeal, the Eleventh
Circuit initially disagreed and vacated Jackson’s sentence.
36 F. 4th 1294, 1306 (2022). But a few months later, the
panel sua sponte vacated its opinion, ordered supplemental
briefing, and in a new opinion affirmed the District Court.
55 F. 4th 846, 862 (2022). The Eleventh Circuit reasoned
that a prior drug conviction is an ACCA predicate if the
state and federal definitions of the drug matched when the
defendant committed the state offense. Id., at 854.
   We granted Brown’s and Jackson’s petitions for a writ of
certiorari and consolidated the two cases. 598 U. S. ___
(2023). We now affirm.
                                II
                                A
   These cases ask what 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2) means when
it refers to a prior state drug offense “involving . . . a con-
trolled substance . . . as defined in section 102 of the [CSA],”
and specifically, whether the federal and state definitions
of a drug must match when the state crime is committed or
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                     5

                          Opinion of the Court

at some later point in time. The parties propose three dif-
ferent answers.
   The Government argues that a prior state drug conviction
qualifies if the federal and state definitions of the relevant
drug matched when the defendant committed the state
crime. Therefore, even if the federal and state definitions
are different when a defendant violates the federal felon-in-
possession law or is sentenced under that law, earlier state
convictions that occurred during the period when the fed-
eral and state definitions were the same nevertheless qual-
ify as “serious drug offense[s].”
   Jackson, by contrast, argues that the federal and state
definitions must match when the defendant violates the
federal felon-in-possession statute. In his view, it does not
matter whether the federal and state laws both criminal-
ized the relevant drug when a defendant possessed or traf-
ficked in it. If the Federal Government later narrows its
definition of that drug, no state conviction under the
broader definition counts against a defendant who later
commits the federal firearm offense.
   This interpretation would mean that Jackson’s two co-
caine convictions are no longer “serious drug offense[s]” be-
cause, years later, the Federal Government narrowed the
definition of cocaine in the federal schedules to legalize a
Parkinson’s drug derived from cocaine. In fact, under Jack-
son’s and the dissent’s interpretation, no Florida cocaine
convictions obtained before July 1, 2017, when Florida also
legalized the derivative, would count. See 2017 Fla. Laws
ch. 2017–110. That would be true even for convictions in-
volving the possession or distribution of huge shipments of
cocaine base.2 And as other courts have noted, cocaine con-
victions under the laws of many other States would likewise
——————
  2 See, e.g., E. Johnson, A Sarasota Drug Sting Brings Results 10 Arrests,

and a Million-Dollar Supply of Cocaine Taken Off, Sarasota Herald-Tribune
(Feb. 4, 2014), https://www.heraldtribune.com/story/news/2014/02/05/a-
sarasota-drug-sting-brings-results-10-arrests-and-a-million-dollar-supply
6                   BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                        Opinion of the Court

be affected. See, e.g., United States v. Perez, 46 F. 4th 691,
698–701 (CA8 2022) (excluding an Iowa conviction under
Jackson’s theory); United States v. Myrick, 2023 WL
2351693, *2 (ED Pa., Mar. 2, 2023) (excluding a Pennsylva-
nia conviction).
   These cocaine convictions would be excluded even though
it is highly unlikely that any were based on the possession
or sale of the Parkinson’s drug. That derivative is radioac-
tive, so it can be produced only through a “highly technical
and complex synthetic route,” and the drug in which it ap-
pears can be stored for no more than 24 hours. Dept. of
Justice, Drug Enforcement Admin., Office of Diversion Con-
trol, Schedule of Controlled Substances: Removal of [123I]Io-
flupane From Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act:
Background, Data, and Analysis 5–6 (2015). Furthermore,
anyone attempting to become intoxicated by using the drug
would need to inject “nearly 6,000 vials,” or “15 liters of
fluid, a volume likely to cause death if administered intra-
venously.” Id., at 2. Unsurprisingly, the Federal Govern-
ment has identified “no case reports” involving individuals
who misused that drug, or any other [123I]ioflupane-contain-
ing product. Id., at 6.
   Brown offers a third option. He contends that the federal
and state definitions must match when the defendant is
sentenced for the federal firearm offense. Under his inter-
pretation, it does not matter whether the two definitions
matched when a defendant previously violated state law or
even when he or she committed the federal firearm offense.
As he sees it, if the federal authorities narrow the definition
of a drug at any point before sentencing, the prior state con-
victions no longer count as ACCA predicates.
   This interpretation would produce strange results in

——————
-of-cocaine-taken-off/29227445007; see also Verdict in State v. Gomez,
No. 2014CF001404–004NC (12th Jud. C. C. Sarasota Cty., Fla., May 1,
2014).
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)              7

                      Opinion of the Court

cases involving long criminal investigations or prosecu-
tions. In this case, for example, Congress adopted the par-
tial exemption of hemp nearly nine months after Brown was
indicted, and more than two years after he violated §922(g).
Under his proposed interpretation, he is exempt from
ACCA’s mandatory minimum only because his prosecution
did not move more quickly.
   Indeed, Brown’s interpretation could result in very differ-
ent sentences for co-defendants who committed the same
state marijuana offense on the same days and likewise com-
mitted the felon-in-possession offense at the same time.
But see 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(6) (instructing sentencing
courts to “avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among
defendants with similar records who have been found guilty
of similar conduct”). Under Brown’s interpretation, if one
co-defendant was sentenced on December 19, 2018, one day
before the Agriculture Improvement Act was signed into
law, and the other was sentenced on December 21, the day
after enactment, ACCA’s 15-year mandatory minimum
would apply to the first but not the second.
                                B
  We must decide which of these three proposed interpre-
tations is correct. Standing alone, the operative phrase “in-
volving . . . a controlled substance (as defined in [the CSA])”
does not definitively answer that question, but precedent
and statutory context show that the Government’s interpre-
tation is correct.
  ACCA is a recidivist statute that gauges what a defend-
ant’s “history of criminal activity” says about his or her “cul-
pability and dangerousness.” McNeill v. United States, 563
U. S. 816, 823 (2011). It does this through a “backward-
looking” examination, id., at 820, of “previous convictions”
that bear on dangerousness, §924(e)(1). Thus, as we ex-
plained in McNeill, ACCA requires sentencing courts to ex-
amine the law as it was when the defendant violated it,
8                    BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                         Opinion of the Court

even if that law is subsequently amended. Id., at 820–822
(listing cases examining the law at the time of the predicate
offense).
    In McNeill, the question was whether a prior state drug
conviction was for a crime that carried the maximum pen-
alty needed to qualify as a “serious drug offense,” i.e., im-
prisonment for 10 years or more. To answer that question,
we looked back to “the law under which the defendant was
convicted” and concluded that a subsequent statutory
amendment reducing the maximum penalty below the 10-
year threshold did not matter. Id., at 820. This “backward-
looking” approach supports the Government’s interpreta-
tion here.
    The plain language of 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(i), the pro-
vision that immediately precedes the provision at issue
here, §924(e)(2)(A)(ii), points to the same conclusion. Sec-
tion 924(e)(2)(A)(i) defines a “serious drug offense” to in-
clude certain federal drug crimes, namely, “offense[s] under
the Controlled Substances Act (21 U. S. C. §801 et seq.)” or
two other federal laws. (Emphasis added.) Any crime con-
tained in the CSA is an offense “under the [CSA].” The
standard “Judgment in a Criminal Case” used in federal
courts indicates whether a defendant was convicted and
sentenced for such an offense,3 and a later change in a fed-
eral drug schedule cannot change that fact. The Govern-
ment’s interpretation would treat state offenses “involving
. . . a controlled substance (as defined in [the CSA])” like
those federal offenses “under the [CSA].” §924(e)(2).
    Petitioners’ interpretations, by contrast, would treat
those federal and state offenses differently. Consider a de-
fendant who was caught distributing cocaine on back-to-
back days, was charged with a federal crime for the first
day’s offense and an identical state crime for the second,
and was convicted of both before the 2015 amendment that
——————
 3 See https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/ao245b.pdf.
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                      9

                           Opinion of the Court

deleted the Parkinson’s drug from the definition of cocaine.
Under petitioners’ interpretations, the federal offense
would remain an ACCA predicate, but the state offense
would not, even though the crimes and the statutes of con-
viction were otherwise identical.
   That is a very strange reading of §§924(e)(2)(A)(i) and (ii).
Both subsections refer to prior offenses relating to the CSA,
and in §924(e)(2)(i) Congress clearly indicated that past
conduct that violated the CSA is probative of a defendant’s
“culpability and dangerousness,” McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823,
even if the federal drug schedule is later amended. There
is no reason to think Congress reached a different judgment
as to petitioners’ conduct merely because they had been con-
victed under a state, rather than federal, statute. Indeed,
it would be unnatural to give back-to-back references to the
CSA starkly different interpretations. See, e.g., Brown v.
Gardner, 513 U. S. 115, 118 (1994); Ratzlaf v. United
States, 510 U. S. 135, 143 (1994).4
                              C
  The Government’s interpretation also best fulfills
ACCA’s statutory objectives. Congress’s “general ap-
proach” in ACCA was to single out “offenses of a certain
level of seriousness that involve violence or an inherent risk


——————
   4 Jackson argues that reading 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2) to refer to the past

would be inconsistent with other statutory references to the CSA that
“must incorporate the CSA schedules at the time of the federal offense.”
Brief for Petitioner Jackson 14. For example, he points to §924(g)(3),
which criminalizes cross-border travel to obtain a firearm intended for
use in a state offense “relating to any controlled substance (as defined in
[the CSA]),” and §342, which prohibits the operator of a common carrier
from operating under the influence of “any controlled substance (as de-
fined in [the CSA]).” But those statutes focus entirely on present-day
conduct, while ACCA refers to “previous convictions.” §924(e)(1). Be-
cause ACCA is concerned with recidivism, it is not inconsistent to read
it differently.
10                   BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

thereof, and that are likely to be committed by career of-
fenders.” Taylor v. United States, 495 U. S. 575, 590 (1990).
Because defendants who have repeatedly committed ACCA
predicate offenses are “especially likely to inflict grave
harm when in possession of a firearm,” ACCA imposes a
higher punishment when they do so. Wooden v. United
States, 595 U. S. 360, 375 (2022); United States v. Rodri-
quez, 553 U. S. 377, 385 (2008) (“[A] second or subsequent
offense is often regarded as more serious because it por-
tends greater future danger and therefore warrants an in-
creased sentence for purposes of deterrence and incapacita-
tion”). A defendant’s “history of criminal activity” does not
“cease to exist” merely because the crime was later rede-
fined. McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823. It therefore makes sense
to ask, as the Government does, whether a prior offense met
ACCA’s definition of seriousness—and thus suggested fu-
ture danger—at the time it was committed.
   Petitioners and the dissent disagree. As Brown puts
it, when the Federal Government “changes the federal
drug schedules,” it “necessarily conclude[s]” that the
de-scheduled substance “does not implicate the culpability
or harm that federal law previously attributed to it.” Reply
Brief for Petitioner Brown 1 (emphasis deleted). Of course,
Brown and Jackson were themselves convicted of crimes in-
volving substances that are still on the federal schedules,
marijuana and cocaine, not hemp or [123I]ioflupane.5 But
even setting that aside, their argument misunderstands the
theory on which ACCA is based.
   A prior drug conviction for an offense punishable by 10
years’ imprisonment augurs a risk of future dangerousness
——————
  5 Latching onto this sentence, the dissent spends three pages accusing

us of departing from the categorical approach. Post, at 11–14 (opinion of
JACKSON, J.). The dissent attacks a strawman. We agree that our prec-
edents require us to ask whether a defendant’s prior conviction matches
ACCA’s requirements. Post, at 11–12. The question here is what ACCA
requires.
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            11

                      Opinion of the Court

even if the drug is no longer considered dangerous. That is
because the conviction reveals that the defendant previ-
ously engaged in illegal conduct that created a dangerous
risk of violence, either with law enforcement or with others
operating in the same illegal field. If left at large, such de-
fendants present a serious risk to public safety.
   That risk “does not cease to exist” if the law under which
the defendant was convicted is later amended or elimi-
nated. McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823. For example, consider a
person who distributed alcohol during Prohibition. The
later legalization of alcohol did not by any means ensure
that these bootleggers would take up legitimate jobs. In-
stead, after the end of Prohibition, many of them simply
shifted to other illegal enterprises. See S. Morison, The Ox-
ford History of the American People 901 (1965) (Prohibition
led to “the building up of a criminal class that turned to
gambling and drugs” after the Eighteenth Amendment was
repealed). Likewise, Brown’s and Jackson’s multiple con-
victions for serious drug crimes are evidence that they may
continue to “ ‘commit a large number of fairly serious crimes
as their means of livelihood’ ” in the future. Wooden, 595
U. S., at 375 (quoting Taylor, 495 U. S., at 587). And that
risk remains true despite the technical changes to the fed-
eral drug schedules on which their arguments hang.
   For this reason, the Court has previously rejected similar
arguments about ACCA’s rationale. Like petitioners here,
the petitioner in McNeill argued that a later reduction in
the maximum sentence for his offense reflected a legislative
judgment that his prior offense was less serious than previ-
ously thought. Brief for Petitioner in No. 10–5258 (CA4),
pp. 15, 35. And this, he suggested, meant that the offense
should no longer be treated as “serious” under ACCA. We
termed that argument “absurd.” McNeill, 563 U. S., at 822.
The “subsequent chang[e] in state law” did not “erase [the]
earlier conviction.” Id., at 823. And it was the fact of that
12                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

earlier conviction—not the legislature’s subsequent judg-
ment—that ACCA was concerned with, because that fact
“demonstrate[d]” the defendant’s “culpability and danger-
ousness.” Ibid.
                            III
 Petitioners and the dissent make various other argu-
ments, but none is persuasive.
                              A
                              1
   Jackson mainly relies on two interpretive tools. He be-
gins with the so-called reference canon. Brief for Petitioner
Jackson 31. This canon, he claims, means that ACCA “in-
corporates [the] schedules . . . ‘as [they] exis[t] whenever a
question under [ACCA] arises.’ ” Id., at 32 (quoting Jam v.
International Finance Corp., 586 U. S. 199, 209 (2019)).
“And,” he says, “the first time a ‘question arises’ under
ACCA is when a person commits [a] federal firearm of-
fense.” Brief for Petitioner Jackson 32.
   The reference canon can be a helpful tool, but Jackson
misuses it. That canon provides that a statutory reference
to a “general subject” incorporates “the law on that subject
as it exists whenever a question under the statute arises.”
Jam, 586 U. S., at 209 (emphasis added). But a reference
“to another statute by specific title or section number”—
such as ACCA’s reference to 21 U. S. C. §802—“in effect
cuts and pastes the referenced statute as it existed when
the referring statute was enacted, without any subsequent
amendments.” 586 U. S., at 209–210 (emphasis added).
That part of the reference canon undermines Jackson’s po-
sition.
   Jackson attempts to rescue his argument by asserting
that ACCA’s mention of the CSA is actually a “general ref-
erence.” Reply Brief for Petitioner Jackson 15. To support
this argument, he cites cases that treat statutes as adopting
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             13

                      Opinion of the Court

“the general law on [a] subject,” even though the statutes
“referred to” that general law “in terms of the sections of
the statutes in which it is to be found.” George Williams
College v. Williams Bay, 242 Wis. 311, 316, 317, 7 N. W. 2d
891, 894 (1943). But even if we assume that there may be
contexts in which references to specific statutory provisions
may be considered “general,” see, e.g., Matter of Commit-
ment of Edward S., 118 N. J. 118, 134, n. 9, 570 A. 2d 917,
925, n. 9 (1990), it is hard to see the phrase “as defined in
section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act” as anything
but a specific reference. 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii).
   And for reasons already set out, the “context” here does
not help Jackson. As we have explained, his reading would
treat a state offense involving a “controlled substance . . .
defined in [the CSA]” differently from a federal offense “un-
der the [CSA],” even though both phrases make reference
to the same Act. Supra, at 8–9. That approach would give
defendants with prior state offenses the benefit of subse-
quent amendments to the CSA but would ignore those same
amendments for prior federal offenses. In that context,
Jackson’s reliance on the reference canon is clearly unper-
suasive.
   Alternatively, Jackson says that his reading is required
by the “settled legal principle” that “the law that sets the
penalty for a federal crime is the law in place when the
crime was committed.” Brief for Petitioner Jackson 17 (cit-
ing Dorsey v. United States, 567 U. S. 260, 272–273 (2012)).
And to show that this principle supports his reading of
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii), he offers a series of hypotheticals involving
amendments to ACCA. Brief for Petitioner Jackson 18–20.
Here is one. If Congress deleted drug possession from the
list of “serious drug offense[s],” he argues, no one would
think that someone who “commit[ted] a federal firearm of-
fense after this change . . . would be subject to ACCA based
on a prior state conviction” for drug possession. Id., at 18.
Therefore, he maintains, the same should be true for
14                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

amendments to the schedules.
  This argument begs the question that these cases pre-
sent, which is whether §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) is amended with
every change in the drug schedules. Jackson imagines a
version of ACCA that plainly would not apply to a prior
state offense because that version would no longer list drug
possession as a “serious” offense, and he then reasons that
the same result should obtain here. But in his hypothetical,
§924(e) was amended. Here, only the federal drug sched-
ules were changed. Jackson’s argument that a change in
the federal drug schedules equates to a change in
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii) is thus nothing more than his reference-
canon argument dressed in different garb. And for the rea-
sons we have explained, we are convinced that the canon
does not work in the way he suggests.
  In all events, Jackson’s emphasis on “the law in place
when the crime was committed” is a red herring. Section
924(e)(2)(A)(ii) currently means that a prior state drug con-
viction may constitute an ACCA predicate if the drugs on
the federal and state schedules matched when the state
drug offense was committed. Thus, contrary to Jackson’s
suggestion, treating his prior convictions as ACCA predi-
cates is entirely consistent with the “settled legal principle”
that current law “sets the penalty for a federal crime.” Id.,
at 17.
                              2
   The dissent agrees with Jackson’s interpretation but for
a different reason. It believes that all cross-references
“plug [in] the referenced provision” as it exists “at the time
of the statute’s interpretation.” Post, at 4–5 (opinion of
JACKSON, J.). Thus, ACCA’s reference to the CSA must in-
corporate “the federal drug schedules that are currently in
effect for sentencing purposes—i.e., those that were effec-
tive at the time of the federal offense.” Post, at 4.
   The problem for the dissent is that none of the cases it
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           15

                     Opinion of the Court

cites supports this proposition. See Yellen v. Confederated
Tribes of Chehalis Reservation, 594 U. S. 338, 344–348
(2021); Astrue v. Capato, 566 U. S. 541, 547–549 (2012);
Carachuri-Rosendo v. Holder, 560 U. S. 563, 566–570
(2010); Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U. S. 1,
8–9 (2010). For good reason: as we have explained, cross-
references sometimes refer to the law as it currently exists,
but they may also incorporate a referenced statute as it ex-
isted when the cross-reference was enacted. Supra, at 12.
Indeed, many of the dissent’s cases stand for the unobjec-
tionable proposition that courts must carefully consider the
text and context of each statute before adopting a one-size-
fits-all approach to cross-references. See Herrmann v. Cen-
com Cable Assoc., Inc., 978 F. 2d 978, 983 (CA7 1992) (at-
tempting to “do the least damage” to unravel “contradictory
enactments”); United States v. Head, 552 F. 3d 640, 645
(CA7 2009) (rejecting a “categorical rule” for “statutory
cross-references”); United States v. Ho, 984 F. 3d 191, 202
(CA2 2020) (rejecting a reference-canon argument incon-
sistent with plain language).
   Following the approach laid out by the dissent’s cases
thus brings us back to the question with which we started:
What is the best reading of ACCA’s cross-reference in light
of context, precedent, and statutory purpose? Supra, at 7.
For the reasons we have explained, it is that a prior state
drug conviction constitutes an ACCA predicate if the drugs
on the federal and state schedules matched when the state
drug offense was committed.
                              B
   We turn next to Brown’s interpretation, which would re-
quire the state and federal definitions to match when the
defendant is sentenced for a federal firearm offense. Brown
first argues that his interpretation is grounded in ACCA’s
text because it focuses on the “here-and-now import” of “his-
torical facts.” Brief for Petitioner Brown 8. Specifically,
16                   BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                          Opinion of the Court

Brown notes that ACCA uses the “present participle of ‘in-
volve,’ ” rather than “the past participle.” Reply Brief for
Petitioner Brown 2–3. And he suggests that the phrase “ ‘as
defined in’ ” is likewise in the present tense. Id., at 3.
  Unfortunately for Brown, we have already rejected this
textual argument.6 The petitioner in McNeill likewise ar-
gued that the present-tense language in ACCA’s definition
of a “serious drug offense” indicated a present-day focus.
563 U. S., at 820. Citing that language, he asked the Court
to require federal courts to “loo[k] to the state law in effect
at the time of the federal sentencing,” ibid., but we declined
to do so. Because “ACCA is concerned with convictions that
have already occurred,” we held that it requires a historical
inquiry into the state law at the time of that prior offense.
Ibid. And the “[u]se of the present tense . . . d[id] not sug-
gest otherwise.” Ibid.
  McNeill’s conclusion makes sense. Use of the present
tense, as opposed to the past, was likely a stylistic rather
than a substantive choice. Around the time of ACCA’s en-
actment, legislative drafters were instructed, “[w]henever
possible,” to “use the present tense (rather than the past or
future).” House Office of the Legislative Counsel, Style
Manual; Drafting Suggestions for the Trained Drafter
§102(c), p. 2 (1989); see also D. Hirsch, Drafting Federal
Law §5.6, p. 45 (2d ed. 1989) (“Various commentators on
drafting have tried, over the years, to persuade drafters to
use the present tense . . . ”). So, at least in the instant con-
text, we cannot place too much weight on the use of the pre-
sent tense as opposed to the past.
  Brown also claims that his reading is required by United
States v. Schooner Peggy, 1 Cranch 103 (1801), which says
that when the law changes while a case is in progress, the

——————
  6 The dissent makes a similar textual argument but does not grapple

with our reasoning in McNeill v. United States, 563 U. S. 816 (2011). See
post, at 6, and n. 2.
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                    17

                          Opinion of the Court

case must be decided under the new law.7 Id., at 110. But
that principle does nothing to advance Brown’s position.
Section 924(e)(2)(A)(ii) has not changed at any point in the
litigation, from the time petitioners committed their federal
offenses until today. Then, as now, under §924 past state
drug possession offenses may qualify as ACCA predicates if
the federal and state schedules matched when the state
crimes occurred.
                               C
  We conclude by addressing some additional arguments
advanced by both petitioners. First, they assert that our
interpretation should be rejected because it is underinclu-
sive—specifically, because it would preclude ACCA en-
hancements for state offenses involving drugs added to the
federal lists only after the state crimes were committed.
But none of the parties’ interpretations captures all cases
involving career criminals. Indeed, Brown and Jackson are
themselves asking to be exempted from ACCA’s reach even
though they both have a history of dealing drugs that re-
main prohibited by federal law.
  Second, petitioners suggest that the Government’s inter-
pretation is absurd because it “would exclude from ACCA’s
reach all state drug convictions from before 1970” when the
CSA was enacted. Brief for Petitioner Jackson 33; accord,
Brief for Petitioner Brown 16. But whether or not this con-
sequence is desirable, it is not absurd.
  We can easily see a reason why Congress might have cho-
sen not to count either federal or state drug convictions that

——————
   7 Brown also likens his interpretation to the “ordinary practice” of ap-

plying Guidelines sentencing enhancements as they exist at sentencing.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 4. But there is reason to doubt that the Guidelines prac-
tice is relevant here. That is because Congress has expressly directed
courts to apply the Guidelines “in effect on the date the defendant is sen-
tenced.” 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii). ACCA contains no similar in-
struction.
18                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                      Opinion of the Court

occurred before 1970. Before that time, “Congress ha[d] en-
acted more than 50 pieces of legislation relating to . . . dan-
gerous drugs,” and this had “given rise to a confusing and
often duplicative approach to . . . enforcement.” H. R. Rep.
No. 91–1444, pt. 1, p. 6 (1970). The CSA was designed to
replace these scattered provisions “with a single compre-
hensive statute.” Cong. Research Serv., L. Sacco, Drug En-
forcement in the United States: History, Policy, and Trends
5 (2014). It was reasonable for Congress to peg ACCA’s pen-
alties to that new comprehensive regulatory scheme rather
than requiring courts to grapple with the welter of federal
drug laws that previously existed.
   Petitioners argue that the Government’s interpretation
would unduly burden courts and defendants by requiring
them to undertake the laborious task of digging up old fed-
eral drug schedules and comparing those to the state laws
the defendants violated. But the difficulty of this task is
overstated. Most drug convictions concern just a few drugs,
and the federal and state definitions of those drugs do not
often change. In the cases now before us, the courts below
had no apparent difficulty finding the needed information.
   Finally, both petitioners contend that the rule of lenity
counsels us to adopt their interpretations. It does not. Len-
ity applies only if a statute remains grievously ambiguous
after we have consulted “ ‘everything from which aid can be
derived.’ ” Pugin v. Garland, 599 U. S. 600, 610 (2023)
(quoting Ocasio v. United States, 578 U. S. 282, 295, n. 8
(2016)). As we have explained, however, context, precedent,
and statutory design adequately show “ ‘what Congress in-
tended.’ ” United States v. Castleman, 572 U. S. 157, 173
(2014) (quoting Barber v. Thomas, 560 U. S. 474, 488
(2010)).
   In any event, neither Jackson’s nor Brown’s interpreta-
tion would be preferable for all defendants. Both interpre-
tations could hurt defendants who committed or were sen-
tenced for the felon-in-possession offense before the
                     Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                   19

                          Opinion of the Court

addition of a drug to the federal schedules. As petitioners’
own briefs highlight, States sometimes criminalize drugs
before the Federal Government does so. See Brief for Peti-
tioner Jackson 34–35; Brief for Petitioner Brown 17. For
instance, Florida banned the stimulant known as bath salts
10 months earlier than the Federal Government.8 And
Utah criminalized the hallucinogen methoxetamine nearly
a decade before the Federal Government followed suit. See
2013 Utah Laws ch. 88; Schedules of Controlled Sub-
stances: Placement of Methoxetamine (MXE) in Schedule I,
87 Fed. Reg. 34166 (2022). State convictions for those drugs
that predate the federal amendments would not count as
ACCA predicates under the Government’s interpretation
but may under petitioners’ interpretations. It would be odd
to use the rule of lenity to help petitioners but harm others.
                       *     *     *
  For these reasons, we hold that a state drug conviction
counts as an ACCA predicate if it involved a drug on the
federal schedules at the time of that offense. Accordingly,
we affirm the judgments of the Courts of Appeals.

                                                      It is so ordered.




——————
  8 Florida Bans ‘Bath Salt’ Drugs After Violent Outbursts, Sun Sentinel

(Jan. 27, 2011), https://www.sun-sentinel.com/2011/01/27/florida-bans-
bath-salt-drugs-after-violent-outbursts; Press Release, Dept. of Justice,
Drug Enforcement Admin., Chemicals Used in “Bath Salts” Now Under
Federal Control and Regulation (Oct. 21, 2011), https://www.dea.gov/
press-releases/2011/10/21/chemicals-used-bath-salts-now-under-federal-
control-and-regulation.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            1

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                         _________________

                   Nos. 22–6389 and 22–6640
                         _________________


      JUSTIN RASHAAD BROWN, PETITIONER
22–6389               v.
                UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
            APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

           EUGENE JACKSON, PETITIONER
22–6640                v.
                 UNITED STATES
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
          APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
                        [May 23, 2024]

  JUSTICE JACKSON, with whom JUSTICE KAGAN joins, and
with whom JUSTICE GORSUCH joins as to Parts I, II, and III,
dissenting.
  The Court maintains that, “[s]tanding alone,” the text of
18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) “does not definitively answer”
the question presented in these cases. Ante, at 7. Instead,
says the majority, we must look beyond the text to prece-
dent, statutory context, and purpose—which apparently
converge to persuade the majority that §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) re-
quires sentencing courts to apply the drug schedules in ef-
fect at the time of a defendant’s prior state drug conviction
when determining the applicability of the 15-year manda-
tory minimum in the Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA).
But the relevant text does definitively answer the question
presented here. And it establishes that courts should apply
the drug schedules in effect at the time of the federal fire-
arms offense that triggers ACCA’s potential application.
Nothing else—not precedent, context, or purpose—requires
2                 BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

a different result. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
                                I
                                A
   As relevant here, ACCA imposes a 15-year mandatory
minimum for defendants who commit a violation of §922(g)
while having “three previous convictions . . . for . . . a seri-
ous drug offense.” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1). Notably, Congress
did not leave unanswered the question of which prior state
convictions qualify as “a serious drug offense” for ACCA
purposes. Rather, ACCA expressly defines the term “seri-
ous drug offense” by direct reference to another federal law.
To qualify as a “serious drug offense,” the prior state crime
must be one “involving manufacturing, distributing, or pos-
sessing with intent to manufacture or distribute, a con-
trolled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Con-
trolled     Substances      Act    (21    U. S. C.    [§]802)).”
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii).
   The dispute in these cases arises from the fact that the
meaning of the term “controlled substance”—as defined by
federal law—can, and frequently does, change. Under the
Controlled Substances Act, a controlled substance is “a drug
or other substance, or immediate precursor, included in
schedule I, II, III, IV, or V.” 21 U. S. C. §802(6). Those five
schedules, which are not contained in the statute itself, are
lists of substances that are “updated and republished on an
annual basis” by the Attorney General. §812(a). During
this annual review, the Attorney General may add or re-
move drugs from the schedules based on various considera-
tions, such as a drug’s “actual or relative potential for
abuse” or the “state of current scientific knowledge regard-
ing the drug.” §811(c); see also, e.g., 21 CFR pt. 1308 (2023)
(setting forth the most recent drug schedules). Congress
itself can also categorically remove substances from the
schedules. See, e.g., 21 U. S. C. §802(16)(B) (excluding
hemp from the schedules).
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)            3

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

   By directing that the term “controlled substance” in
ACCA be determined on the basis of the Controlled Sub-
stances Act’s definition—which itself references the federal
drug schedules—Congress has opted to rely on a federal
statute that contains its own cross-reference to a dynamic
list of prohibited substances. ACCA’s “serious drug offense”
definition thus incorporates those oft-changing drug sched-
ules by reference.
                               B
  The majority and I are in full agreement that, conse-
quently, a sentencing court deciding whether to impose
ACCA’s 15-year mandatory minimum for a violation of
§922(g) must consult those external drug schedules to de-
termine whether the drug “ ‘involv[ed]’ ” in a prior state of-
fense is a controlled substance under federal law. See ante,
at 1–2. Yet, somehow, the majority concludes that the per-
tinent drug schedules for ACCA’s sentencing exercise are
those that were in effect when the prior state drug crime
occurred. In my view, a straightforward application of the
aforementioned statutory text plainly establishes other-
wise.
  First of all, ACCA expressly defines “serious drug of-
fense,” §924(e)(2)(A), and “[w]hen a statute includes an ex-
plicit definition, we must follow that definition,” Burgess v.
United States, 553 U. S. 124, 130 (2008) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Congress could have defined “serious drug
offense” based solely on state law. It did not. Instead, Con-
gress made clear that only state drug crimes that involve
substances that qualify as “controlled substance[s]” under
the Controlled Substances Act are sufficiently serious to
warrant ACCA’s penalty.
  Second, the definition of “serious drug offense” that ap-
pears in ACCA cross-references the highly mutable federal
drug schedules—a drafting device that does particular
4                 BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

work in the legislative context. Consistent with the opera-
tion of cross-references elsewhere, the cross-reference in
ACCA’s “serious drug offense” definition necessarily directs
sentencing courts to consult the current federal drug sched-
ules—i.e., those in effect at the time of the federal offense
for which the defendant is being sentenced—rather than
some earlier version of those lists.
   That is, quite simply, how cross-references work. When
it comes time to interpret a statute, courts typically plug
the referenced provision, as they find it, into the statutory
text. They do not consider, much less account for, any
amendments that might have taken place over the course
of the referenced provision’s existence. Nor does it matter
that the referenced statute is a separate pronouncement
that has its own legislative history and course of develop-
ment.
   Courts proceed in this straightforward plug-and-play
manner with respect to statutory cross-references because
“the presumed temporal application of a statute” is when
“the relevant activity that the [statute] regulates” occurs.
Landgraf v. USI Film Products, 511 U. S. 244, 291 (1994)
(Scalia, J., concurring in judgments). That presumption ap-
plies with full force to any provisions cross-referenced in a
statute, because “incorporating one statute or system of
statutes into another . . . serves to bring into the latter all
that is fairly covered by the reference.” Panama R. Co. v.
Johnson, 264 U. S. 375, 392 (1924). And what is fairly cov-
ered is the referenced law as it exists when the statute’s
application is required. See Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 291.
   Until today, that had been our consistent practice. See,
e.g., Yellen v. Confederated Tribes of Chehalis Reservation,
594 U. S. 338, 344–348 (2021) (applying the cross-refer-
enced definition then in effect); Astrue v. Capato, 566 U. S.
541, 547–549 (2012) (same); Carachuri-Rosendo v. Holder,
560 U. S. 563, 566–570 (2010) (same); Holder v. Humani-
tarian Law Project, 561 U. S. 1, 8–9 (2010) (same). When a
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)             5

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

statute contains a cross-reference to another provision, we
have always simply applied the version of the other provi-
sion in effect at the time the cross-referenced provision was
needed, even if Congress amended that provision at some
point in the past.
  Of course, this way of interpreting statutes with cross-
references means that a change in the referenced provision
has the effect of changing the statute that contains the
cross-reference. But that is a feature, not a bug, of statu-
tory cross-references. In fact, Congress often uses the cross-
reference device in a statute “precisely because the [refer-
enced provision] may be amended.” Herr-mann v. Cencom
Cable Assoc., Inc., 978 F. 2d 978, 983 (CA7 1992) (Easter-
brook, J.) (emphasis added). Far from being problematic,
one      useful     feature     of    a    statutory     cross-
reference from the standpoint of the legislative drafter is
that it “permits the effect of a change in one section to prop-
agate to other, related, sections without rewriting all of
those related sections.” Ibid.
  That basic understanding of how cross-references work
easily resolves these cases. ACCA mandates that, for the
purpose of its “serious drug offense” definition, a “controlled
substance” must be determined in accordance with the Con-
trolled Substances Act, 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii), and the
Controlled Substances Act, in turn, looks to the substances
on the drug schedules, 21 U. S. C. §802(6). Congress’s in-
corporation of the drug schedules by cross-reference in this
manner means that a sentencing court must plug in the
drug schedules as it finds them based on when “the relevant
activity that the [statute] regulates” occurs. Landgraf, 511
U. S., at 291. For ACCA, as with other federal criminal
statutes, that means the court must apply the drug sched-
ules in effect when the defendant “commits the underlying
conduct that makes the offender liable.” Dorsey v. United
6                    BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

States, 567 U. S. 260, 272 (2012).1
   To be sure, one consequence of this approach is that, as
the drug schedules change, so does the meaning of “con-
trolled substance” under ACCA. See Herrmann, 978 F. 2d,
at 983. But, again, Congress seems to have intended that
result, insofar as the statute it wrote pegs ACCA’s “serious
drug offense” definition to lists of substances that the At-
torney General is required to revisit on an annual basis. In-
deed, Congress presumably chose to cross-reference those
drug lists (rather than copying them directly into ACCA)
precisely because of their dynamic nature.
   The fact that ACCA’s “serious drug offense” definition
uses the present tense, as the majority concedes, see ante,
at 16, further bolsters the conclusion that Congress was
consciously incorporating the annual updates that the fed-
eral drug schedules embody. As we have previously recog-
nized, “the present tense generally does not include the
past.” Carr v. United States, 560 U. S. 438, 448 (2010). If
Congress had wanted to reference a past version of the drug
schedules, it easily could have indicated as much in the text
of ACCA. But Congress used the present tense instead, di-
recting sentencing courts to look to the meaning of “con-
trolled substance” in effect when a defendant commits the
federal crime requiring ACCA’s application, not at some
previous point in time.2
——————
   1 Brown argues that, as a sentencing statute, ACCA incorporates the

drug schedules that are in effect when a District Court gives legal effect
to its provisions—i.e., at the time of the federal sentencing. See ante, at
6. While Congress determined that the Sentencing Guidelines should
follow that approach, see 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii), we have recog-
nized that the so-called federal saving statute, 1 U. S. C. §109, generally
requires courts to apply the criminal statutes in effect at the time the
defendant committed the federal crime, see Dorsey, 567 U. S., at 272.
Only Jackson’s approach is consistent with that precedent. See ante, at
5.
   2 The majority attributes ACCA’s use of the present tense to a mere

“stylistic” choice by Congress, relying primarily on a contemporaneous
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                      7

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

                              II
  The Government rejects the foregoing description of how
statutory cross-references operate. Tr. of Oral Arg. 58 (ex-
pressing “disagree[ment] that the background rule is that
we always look to the contemporaneous referenced law”).
The Government insists that, instead of merely calling for
insertion of the referenced law, the appearance of a cross-ref-
erence in a statute “raises a temporal question” that re-
quires a court to determine “which version of [the cross-ref-
erenced provision] Congress intend[ed] to reference.” Id.,
at 56. As the Government sees it, every statutory cross-
reference can thus have “different temporal branches de-
pending on context.” Id., at 58; see also ante, at 15 (appear-
ing to adopt this temporally flexible approach to cross-ref-
erences).
  That cannot be right. We have never viewed statutory
cross-references as a gateway to the multiverse. Cf. Clark
v. Martinez, 543 U. S. 371, 382 (2005) (rejecting an ap-
proach that “would render every statute a chameleon”). No
case that I am aware of has ever asked whether some past
version of the statute applies when the court is interpreting
a provision that contains a cross-reference—and neither the
——————
legislative drafting manual as support for that conclusion. Ante, at 16.
But the wholly speculative suggestion that ACCA’s drafters actually re-
lied on the cited manual’s tense-related directives conveniently comes
out of nowhere. Moreover, to the extent the majority now believes that
verb tense is irrelevant when a court undertakes to interpret the text of
a statute, it has taken a strange and unwarranted departure from this
Court’s ordinary interpretive practices. Before today, we have consist-
ently used all aspects of a statute’s text to ascertain its meaning, includ-
ing the verbs that Congress chooses. See, e.g., Barton v. Barr, 590 U. S.
222, 236 (2020); Carr v. United States, 560 U. S. 438, 448 (2010); United
States v. Wilson, 503 U. S. 329, 333 (1992); Gwaltney of Smithfield, Ltd.
v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation, Inc., 484 U. S. 49, 57 (1987). An objection
to this approach has surfaced only once before, in dissent. See Carr, 560
U. S., at 462–464 (opinion of ALITO, J.) (relying on legislative drafting
manuals to suggest that the tense of the verbs in a statute was not rele-
vant to the provision’s interpretation).
8                      BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                          JACKSON, J., dissenting

majority nor the Government cites any. In fact, our actual
practices establish the contrary. Whenever we have ad-
dressed a statutory cross-reference, we have always taken
the same tried-and-true approach that we employ with re-
spect to statutory definitions: We plug in the referenced
provision as it exists at the moment the statute’s provisions
become applicable. See Part I–B, supra.
  Any other approach risks chaos. Again, Congress often
uses cross-references in statutes “precisely because the [ref-
erenced provision] may be amended,” thereby allowing that
amendment “to propagate to other, related, sections with-
out rewriting all of those related sections.” Herrmann, 978
F. 2d, at 983. The Government’s view would unsettle that
longstanding drafting convention, injecting uncertainty
into what Congress must do to amend statutes using cross-
references. What is more, if every cross-reference raised a
question about which version of the referenced statute ap-
plies—past or present—interpretation of federal statutes
with cross-references would become entirely unworkable.
Cross-references are legion in the U. S. Code, and cross-
referenced statutes are regularly amended. Under the Gov-
ernment’s approach, every one of those amendments would
become a jump ball, inviting competing interpretations
about which version of the referenced statute applies.
  The Government claims that this disordered way of ap-
plying cross-references stems from the so-called reference
canon, which sometimes directs courts to apply a past ver-
sion of a referenced statute. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 56, 58.3
——————
   3 The reference canon has two strains, general and specific. First,

“[w]hen a statute refers to a general subject, the statute adopts the law
on that subject as it exists whenever a question under the statute arises.”
Jam v. International Finance Corp., 586 U. S. 199, 209 (2019). Second,
when there is “a statute that refers to another statute by specific title or
section number,” that cross-reference “in effect cuts and pastes the ref-
erenced statute as it existed when the referring statute was enacted,
without any subsequent amendments.” Id., at 209–210; see also Hassett
v. Welch, 303 U. S. 303, 314 (1938). It is not clear that this latter, specific
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                      9

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

But even if the reference canon applies under these circum-
stances, it seems to cut against the Government’s interpre-
tation. The Government asserts that, because ACCA refer-
ences a specific section—“section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act,” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii)—the reference
canon “would suggest that the ACCA incorporated the
schedules as they existed in 1986, when the cross-reference
was enacted.” Brief for United States 42. But conspicu-
ously missing from this discussion (as well as the majority’s
discussion of the reference canon, see ante, at 12–13) is the
actual text of the cross-referenced provision at issue in
these cases, which comes nowhere near incorporation of a
static, historical list of substances.
   Instead, as explained above, ACCA’s “serious drug of-
fense” definition cross-references §102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, see 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii), and under
that provision, a “controlled substance” is “a drug or other
substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I,
II, III, IV, or V,” 21 U. S. C. §802(6) (emphasis added). This
juxtaposition turns what appears to be a specific statutory
reference into a more general one, since it is impossible to
determine which substances fall under the statutory defini-
tion without knowing what the five schedules contain. And
because those schedules are designed to change over time,
it is hard to view ACCA’s reference to the controlled sub-
stances definition of the Controlled Substances Act as any-
thing other than an instruction for courts to consult “an ex-
ternal body of potentially evolving law” and “adop[t] the law
on that subject as it exists whenever a question under the
——————
form of the canon even applies in the absence of uncertainty about what,
exactly, is being cross-referenced, such as “a facial defect with the cross-
reference or target statute being interpreted.” United States v. Head,
552 F. 3d 640, 647 (CA7 2009) (collecting cases); see also United States
v. Ho, 984 F. 3d 191, 202 (CA2 2020) (forgoing “unnecessary resort to the
reference canon” and instead interpreting the statute consistent with its
plain language).
10               BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

statute arises.” Jam v. International Finance Corp., 586
U. S. 199, 209–210 (2019).
  The upshot is that proper application of the reference
canon here leads to the same conclusion that I reached
above. The cross-reference in ACCA incorporates drug
schedules that are updated annually and does so in the pre-
sent tense, thereby requiring sentencing courts to merely
plug in the drug schedules in effect at the time of the de-
fendant’s federal firearms offense—i.e., the relevant
timeframe for the purpose of the court’s interpretation of
ACCA’s “serious drug offense” language.
                               III
  In rejecting the typical, straightforward understanding of
ACCA’s cross-reference, the majority pivots away from the
text of the statute entirely, and purportedly bases the
Court’s conclusion on “precedent and statutory context.”
Ante, at 7. Neither our precedents nor the context of this
statute actually compels a different conclusion than the text
does, for the reasons explained below.
                              A
   To start, the majority misreads our precedent. In McNeill
v. United States, 563 U. S. 816 (2011), we considered how to
determine whether a state drug crime involved “a maxi-
mum term of imprisonment of ten years or more” under
state law. §924(e)(2)(A)(ii). McNeill instructed sentencing
courts making this determination to undertake a “back-
ward-looking” inquiry by “consult[ing]” “the law under
which the defendant was convicted”—that is, “the version
of state law that the defendant was actually convicted of
violating.” 563 U. S., at 820–821.
   The majority contends that this same “ ‘backward-
looking’ ” approach should apply to the federal drug sched-
ules. Ante, at 8 (quoting McNeill, 563 U. S., at 820). But
the federal drug schedules are not “the law under which the
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           11

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

defendant was convicted.” Id., at 820. And of course
McNeill was “backward-looking”; any inquiry into a defend-
ant’s statute of conviction is necessarily so. Here, both the
Government and petitioners take as a given “the version of
state law that the defendant was actually convicted of vio-
lating,” as McNeill instructs. Id., at 821. The question pre-
sented in these cases—on which the parties disagree—is
how to evaluate whether that prior state-law conviction
qualifies as a “serious drug offense” under federal law.
   In other words, McNeill asked what state crime the de-
fendant committed, while today’s cases ask how ACCA as-
sesses that conviction. The latter is an entirely distinct in-
quiry. And for all the reasons discussed above, the federal
benchmark that Congress has selected is not “backward-
looking” in the least—it rationally incorporates the cur-
rently applicable drug schedules, not ones from the past.
See Part I, supra.
   The majority’s opinion not only misconstrues McNeill, it
also flatly contradicts other precedents from this Court out-
lining how to determine whether a prior state conviction
qualifies as an ACCA predicate. See, e.g., Mathis v. United
States, 579 U. S. 500, 504 (2016); Taylor v. United States,
495 U. S. 575, 599–602 (1990). As the majority only scantly
mentions, to determine whether a state crime is a “serious
drug offense,” courts are not supposed to rely on the actual
or alleged facts related to the prior state drug crime. Ra-
ther, they ask “if the State’s definition of the drug in ques-
tion ‘matche[s]’ the definition under federal law.” Ante, at
2 (quoting Shular v. United States, 589 U. S. 154, 158
(2020); alteration in original). We have referred to this
matching process as the “ ‘categorical approach.’ ” Id., at
157 (quoting Taylor, 495 U. S., at 600).
   Under that methodology, “[a] court must look only to the
state offense’s elements, not the facts of the case or labels
pinned to the state conviction.” Shular, 589 U. S., at 160.
Thus, we do not ask how the State classified or categorized
12                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

the prior offense. Nor does it matter what type of drug a
defendant actually manufactured, possessed, or sold. Such
facts are “extraneous to the crime’s legal requirements,”
and “ACCA, as we have always understood it, cares not a
whit about them.” Mathis, 579 U. S., at 504. Properly ap-
plied, the categorical approach mandates that a court’s sole
focus must be on identifying the state crime’s statutory ele-
ments and determining whether they categorically match
the ACCA predicate.
   By appearing to fixate on the facts of petitioners’ prior
state drug offenses, the majority’s opinion thus diverges
from our precedents. For example, the majority puzzlingly
suggests that our standard methodology for assessing state
crimes in relation to federal law provides a loophole for
these petitioners, because “Brown and Jackson were them-
selves convicted of crimes involving substances that are still
on the federal schedules, marijuana and cocaine, not hemp
or [123I]ioflupane.” Ante, at 10. But, again, the entire point
of the categorical approach is that courts may consider only
the state crime’s elements, not the substances actually in-
volved in that crime, when undertaking to determine
whether the state crime matches the federal standard.
   This matters because ensuring adherence to the categor-
ical approach, which the majority fails to do here, serves
important objectives. We employ the categorical approach
not only because Congress commanded it, see Taylor, 495
U. S., at 589, but also because it “avoids unfairness to de-
fendants,” Mathis, 579 U. S., at 512, who may not have
sought to have the state records accurately reflected the de-
tails of the crime they committed.
   Suppose, for example, that Brown—whose conviction was
reportedly for marijuana—was, in fact, prosecuted by the
State for conduct involving hemp, as some defendants were.
See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Harrelson, 14 S. W. 3d 541, 544
(Ky. 2000); see also New Hampshire Hemp Council, Inc. v.
Marshall, 203 F. 3d 1, 5 (CA1 2000) (noting that “the threat
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           13

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

of federal prosecution [was] realistic” when hemp was still
on the federal schedules). The distinction between a con-
viction for a drug crime involving marijuana versus one in-
volving hemp could be a significant one for purposes of a
future firearms prosecution that might trigger ACCA. But
a defendant in Brown’s position would likely have “no in-
centive to contest” that his conduct involved hemp, not an-
other form of marijuana, during the state prosecution be-
cause that fact did “not matter under the law” at that time.
Mathis, 579 U. S., at 512. Indeed, he might well have been
“precluded from doing so by the [state] court.” Ibid. It is
highly unlikely that such a defendant could even contem-
plate that his state conviction would be relevant to a future
ACCA conviction, because most state crimes have “no sig-
nificance under federal law for years to come.” Johnson v.
United States, 544 U. S. 295, 305 (2005).
   Unfairness arises without the categorical approach, be-
cause such a defendant’s punishment would be significantly
increased under ACCA for a prior state crime involving
hemp simply due to his failure to anticipate, at the time of
his state convictions, a future change in the federal drug
schedules. The categorical approach responds to that un-
fairness by relying exclusively on the elements of the state
crime, rather than the underlying facts of the crime.
   So, as long as the drug substances expressly prohibited
by state law differ from those that the federal law pro-
scribes, then that state law is not a categorical match to
ACCA’s “serious drug offense” definition, and a conviction
under that statute cannot be used as an ACCA predicate.
Here, however, the majority suggests that the categorical
mismatch is irrelevant because, regardless, petitioners’
state crimes actually involved types of drugs that have re-
mained on the federal schedules during all potentially per-
tinent time periods. Ante, at 10. That reasoning not only
fails to follow our well-established methodology, it also per-
petuates the same unfairness that the categorical approach
14                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

is designed to mitigate.
                               B
   The majority fares no better with statutory context. The
majority’s opinion points to ACCA’s other definition of “se-
rious drug offense,” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(i), which clas-
sifies certain federal crimes as “serious drug offenses.” That
provision defines a “serious drug offense” as “an offense un-
der the Controlled Substances Act (21 U. S. C. [§]801
et seq.), the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act
(21 U. S. C. [§]951 et seq.), or chapter 705 of title 46 for
which a maximum term of imprisonment of ten years or
more is prescribed by law.” §924(e)(2)(A)(i). As the major-
ity notes, this definition turns solely on “whether a defend-
ant was convicted and sentenced for such an offense, and a
later change in a federal drug schedule cannot change that
fact.” Ante, at 8 (footnote omitted). In the majority’s view,
we should avoid “treat[ing] . . . federal and state offenses
differently,” so the applicability of ACCA’s penalty to prior
state crimes, too, must be based simply on whether the fed-
eral drug schedules matched state law at the time of the
defendant’s prior state conviction. Ibid.
   Whatever the merits of treating federal and state offenses
the same way might be, Congress did not draft ACCA to
achieve that result. When this Court previously addressed
these same two ACCA provisions in response to a similar
argument, it recognized that “the divergent text of the two
provisions of the serious-drug-offense definition . . . makes
any divergence in their application unremarkable.” Shular,
589 U. S., at 164 (internal quotation marks omitted). Con-
gress certainly could have used the same classification met-
ric for federal and state priors—say, by classifying federal
crimes as “serious drug offenses” based on the particular
controlled substances involved, as it did with state crimes—
but did not do so. And we generally “ ‘presume differences
in language . . . convey differences in meaning,’ ” especially
                  Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           15

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

“when the same Congress passed both statutes to handle
much the same task.” Wisconsin Central Ltd. v. United
States, 585 U. S. 274, 279 (2018) (quoting Henson v. San-
tander Consumer USA Inc., 582 U. S. 79, 86 (2017)). Con-
gress’s choice to phrase the two “serious drug offense” defi-
nitions in ACCA differently “requires respect, not
disregard.” Wisconsin Central, 585 U. S., at 279.
   At any rate, unlike the first subsection of ACCA’s “serious
drug offense” definition, the second subsection involves
classifying state crimes based on federal law—a circum-
stance that, as I previously explained, requires the categor-
ical approach. See supra, at 13–14. This means that some
federal-state discrepancy as to the kinds of crimes that are
deemed “serious drug offenses” is not at all surprising or
unusual; it is par for the course. See Shular, 589 U. S., at
164.
   To see why, consider one example. The Controlled Sub-
stances Act provides that “it shall be unlawful for any per-
son knowingly or intentionally . . . to manufacture, distrib-
ute, or dispense, or possess with intent to manufacture,
distribute, or dispense, a controlled substance.” 21 U. S. C.
§841(a)(1). We have previously recognized that “the stat-
ute’s word ‘knowingly’ . . . appl[ies] to all the subsequently
listed elements of the crime” in this provision, meaning that
the Government must prove that a defendant knew he was
dealing with a controlled substance. Flores-Figueroa v.
United States, 556 U. S. 646, 650 (2009). State law, by con-
trast, does not always include such a knowledge require-
ment. See United States v. Smith, 983 F. 3d 1213, 1223
(CA11 2020). We have nonetheless recognized that ACCA
applies differently to state and federal drug crimes on this
basis. See Shular, 589 U. S., at 164.
   Thus, the ultimate question is not whether ACCA re-
quires consistency between the classification of federal and
state crimes, as the majority suggests. Instead, given some
inevitable inconsistency between state and federal law, our
16               BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

inquiry is “which form of consistency Congress intended.”
Id., at 165. Here, Congress’s use of an express cross-refer-
ence to the Controlled Substance Act’s mutating drug
schedules in the state-crime definition—coupled with its
omission of such a cross-reference in the federal-crime def-
inition—indicates that inconsistency based on drug type
was not only anticipated but intended.
  In short, the presence of a differently worded
§924(e)(2)(A)(i) does not overcome the plain meaning of
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii).
                              IV
   Finally, the majority contends that its reading “best ful-
fills ACCA’s statutory objectives.” Ante, at 9. But that as-
sertion fails to appreciate ACCA’s actual goals. Congress
has plainly designated serious drug offenses in a defend-
ant’s criminal history as triggers for ACCA’s 15-year man-
datory minimum for a reason—because the seriousness of
the defendant’s prior drug-related history is indicative of
that defendant’s future dangerousness, given the present
firearms offense. The majority’s analysis falters because it
does not, and frankly cannot, explain how future danger-
ousness is best assessed by reference to outdated drug
schedules.
   Congress indisputably enacted ACCA to incapacitate
what it viewed to be a class of especially dangerous defend-
ants—“the eponymous ‘armed career criminal.’ ” Wooden v.
United States, 595 U. S. 360, 375 (2022). The 15-year man-
datory minimum that ACCA imposes is among the harshest
mandatory penalties in the Federal Criminal Code, and
“the length of the mandatory minimum was set at 15 years”
specifically “to incapacitate the armed career criminal for
the rest of the normal time span of his career[,] which usu-
ally starts at about age 15 and continues to about age 30.”
S. Rep. No. 97–585, p. 7 (1982). This means that ACCA is
not a simple recidivist statute that merely tallies up past
                     Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                  17

                        JACKSON, J., dissenting

offenses, as the majority suggests, see ante, at 10–11,
thereby imposing a drastically increased penalty for illegal
firearms possession based on a “once a criminal, always a
criminal” perspective. Rather, Congress designed ACCA to
help courts identify a certain category of defendants—those
who, having a particular kind of criminal history and now
unlawfully possessing a gun, pose such a distinct risk of fu-
ture dangerousness that a lengthy term of incapacitation is
warranted.4
   “In order to determine which offenders fall into this cate-
gory,” ACCA directs a sentencing court to conduct a review
of a defendant’s “past crimes” under state law, looking for
violent felonies or serious drug offenses, “because . . . crim-
inal history is relevant . . . to the kind or degree of danger
the offender would pose were he to possess a gun.” Begay
v. United States, 553 U. S. 137, 146 (2008). But, im-
portantly, ACCA does not deem every state crime a predi-
cate for the 15-year mandatory minimum. Instead, the
statute specifies certain categories of crimes that trigger
application of the prescribed penalty, due to the “prior
crime’s relevance to the possibility of future danger with a
gun.” Ibid.
   ACCA’s focus on incapacitating certain defendants based
on their potential future dangerousness makes it entirely
sensible that the statute directs courts to identify “serious
drug offense[s]” (as well as “violent felon[ies]”) in a defend-
ant’s background. 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1). What does not
make sense is the majority’s suggestion that ACCA requires
the extended incapacitation of defendants based on past
criminal conduct that federal law does not deem serious to-

——————
  4 “Of course, to say that Congress had reasons” to enact ACCA’s sen-

tencing scheme “is not to endorse those policy choices.” Consumer Fi-
nancial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Assn. of
America, Ltd., 601 U. S. ___, ___ (2024) (JACKSON, J., concurring) (slip
op., at 3).
18                BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                     JACKSON, J., dissenting

day. In other words, if the point of ACCA is the incapacita-
tion of certain defendants—those whose histories of serious
criminality indicate a propensity to commit future danger-
ous crimes in light of their unlawful possession of a
weapon—how does a record that contains past crimes in-
volving drugs that are no longer controlled substances help
to identify especially dangerous defendants? It does not.
   In reality, that goal is achieved only by determining
whether a defendant’s past crimes are considered serious
by today’s standards. The federal drug schedules are spe-
cifically updated to account for current views of dangerous-
ness. See Part I–A, supra. And a drug’s removal from those
schedules reflects a determination that the drug is no
longer deemed dangerous based on criteria such as “[i]ts ac-
tual or relative potential for abuse” and “[t]he state of cur-
rent scientific knowledge regarding the drug.” 21 U. S. C.
§811(c). Accordingly, ACCA is best interpreted as referenc-
ing the drug schedules that are effective as of the date of
the commission of the gun crime that triggers ACCA’s ap-
plicability, rather than those that would have signaled se-
riousness at some prior time. “Indeed, it would be illogical
to conclude that federal sentencing law attaches ‘culpability
and dangerousness’ to an act that . . . Congress has con-
cluded is not culpable and dangerous.” United States v.
Bautista, 989 F. 3d 698, 703 (CA9 2021) (Fletcher, J.).
   Meanwhile, the majority’s view misses the mark that
Congress set for ACCA’s sentencing scheme in another re-
spect as well: It leaves out many defendants who do war-
rant incapacitation for dangerousness—those who have
prior convictions for trafficking drugs that were scheduled
as controlled substances by the time their §922(g) offenses
were committed but were not on the federal drug schedules
when their prior state convictions occurred. The majority
concedes that its interpretation would exclude from ACCA’s
“serious drug offense” definition state drug crimes that oc-
cur when “States . . . criminalize drugs before the Federal
                     Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)                  19

                        JACKSON, J., dissenting

Government does so.” Ante, at 19. This happens not infre-
quently, such as when a State criminalizes new, cutting-
edge drugs. See, e.g., ibid. (discussing the criminalization
of bath salts and methoxetamine by States before the Fed-
eral Government); see also Brief for Petitioner Jackson 34–
35 (citing other examples); Brief for Petitioner Brown 17
(same).
   Under the majority’s approach, ACCA’s intended assess-
ment of future dangerousness via the consideration of past
state drug crimes would not apply to defendants if their
prior state convictions took place before the drugs they traf-
ficked were federally scheduled. But under the statutory
scheme Congress actually adopted, there is no reason a de-
fendant’s early engagement with dangerous new drug sub-
stances criminalized by state law should not qualify as
ACCA predicates, especially since the federal drug sched-
ules are frequently updated to account for precisely this sort
of newfound danger, consistent with ACCA’s broader ap-
proach.
   Ultimately, then, for all its talk of statutory goals, the
majority’s opinion elides the true purpose of ACCA’s man-
datory minimum scheme in multiple ways. It also down-
plays the means Congress adopted to advance its incapaci-
tation objectives, by essentially ignoring the link the
statute draws between potential future dangerousness, as
partially evidenced by the seriousness of a defendant’s past
drug activity, and the need for lengthy incapacitation,
which the statute provides. Breezing past these key nu-
ances, the majority simply announces its own apparent
view that “[a] prior drug conviction for an offense punisha-
ble by 10 years’ imprisonment augurs a risk of future dan-
gerousness even if the drug is no longer considered danger-
ous.” Ante, at 11.5

——————
 5 The majority’s opinion offers no concrete evidence for this empirical
20                    BROWN v. UNITED STATES

                         JACKSON, J., dissenting

                         *    *     *
   At bottom, the majority’s reasoning appears to reduce to
a disagreement with Congress’s legislative judgment, em-
bodied in the text of the Controlled Substances Act, that a
change in the drug schedules is a change in the perceived
dangerousness of a drug that should have a material impact
on the determination whether incapacitation is warranted.
See 21 U. S. C. §811(a). The Court’s ruling thus displaces
Congress’s decision to base ACCA’s 15-year mandatory pen-
alty on the evolving dangerousness determinations that the
Controlled Substances Act incorporates rather than on
static impressions about a defendant’s recidivist tendencies
based solely on the fact that they have previously commit-
ted crimes.
   The majority’s contrary holding seems to reflect its own
policy view that “Brown’s and Jackson’s multiple convic-
tions” pose a significant risk of future dangerousness “de-
spite the technical changes to the federal drug schedules.”
Ante, at 11. But the choice of how to assess and address
dangerousness belongs first and foremost to Congress. And
for the reasons I have explained, Congress designed ACCA
to take a different approach—to measure future dangerous-
ness by today’s drug schedules, not outdated ones from the
past. See Part I, supra. One might harbor doubts that the
——————
assertion. And its strained analogy to bootleggers at the end of Prohibi-
tion, who supposedly “shifted to other illegal enterprises,” ante, at 11,
paints a woefully incomplete historical picture. Contrary to the major-
ity’s contentions, the end of Prohibition allowed many of those previously
involved in the illegal alcohol trade to transition into successful, legiti-
mate careers. See, e.g., D. Okrent, Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohi-
bition 359–360 (2010) (discussing Samuel Bronfman, a former bootlegger
who turned his company Seagram’s into one of the largest
liquor-distribution corporations in the world). Regardless, there is
simply no evidence in ACCA’s legislative history or otherwise that Con-
gress drew the same historical lessons from Prohibition that the majority
does, or that ACCA was motivated in any respect by our Nation’s experi-
ences during Prohibition.
                 Cite as: 602 U. S. ____ (2024)           21

                    JACKSON, J., dissenting

sentencing policy that Congress enacted is sensible, just, or
effective. But it is the one that Congress wrote, and we re-
main dutybound to apply the law as written. In my view,
the majority has failed to do so here.