Cite as: 607 U. S. ____ (2025)             1

                           Per Curiam

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
  TERENCE CLARK, DIRECTOR, PRINCE GEORGE’S
  COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, ET AL.
       v. JEREMIAH ANTOINE SWEENEY
   ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED
   STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
             No. 25–52.   Decided November 24, 2025

  PER CURIAM.
  A Maryland jury found Jeremiah Sweeney guilty of
second-degree murder and several other crimes. Sweeney’s
convictions were affirmed on appeal, and his bid for post-
conviction relief in state court was unsuccessful. Sweeney
sought habeas relief in Federal District Court, and that
court, too, denied relief. But the Fourth Circuit reversed
and ordered a new trial, relying on a claim that Sweeney
never asserted. Because the Court of Appeals departed dra-
matically from the principle of party presentation, we re-
verse.
                               I
   According to the State’s witnesses at trial, Jeremiah
Sweeney was arguing one night with neighbors about sto-
len marijuana. He eventually opened fire, missing his in-
tended targets but killing a bystander who was about 75
yards away. At issue during trial was whether Sweeney
could have been the shooter given his location and the angle
of the bullet wound.
   After the State rested its case, Juror 4’s curiosity got the
best of him, and he decided to check out the crime scene for
himself. Shortly after jury deliberations began, Juror 4 told
the jury about his visit, and the jury promptly reported his
visit to the court. The parties conferred and eventually
agreed that rather than declare a mistrial, the court would
dismiss Juror 4 and deliberations would proceed with 11
2                     CLARK v. SWEENEY

                          Per Curiam

jurors. Sweeney was convicted, and his convictions were
affirmed on direct appeal.
   Sweeney later filed a petition for postconviction relief in
state court. He argued, among other things, that his trial
counsel was ineffective under Strickland v. Washington,
466 U. S. 668, 686 (1984), for not seeking to voir dire the
entire jury to ensure that no other juror was tainted by Ju-
ror 4’s unauthorized crime-scene visit. The state court de-
nied relief after a hearing. With the help of appointed coun-
sel, Sweeney then petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus
under 28 U. S. C. §2254 in Federal District Court. As in
state court, Sweeney argued that his trial counsel was inef-
fective for not seeking to voir dire the entire jury. The Dis-
trict Court denied Sweeney’s petition, concluding that the
state court’s application of Strickland was not objectively
unreasonable.
   In an unpublished opinion, the Fourth Circuit reversed—
but not on the ineffective-assistance claim that Sweeney
brought.     Instead, the Fourth Circuit declared that
Sweeney’s trial was marred by a “combination of extraordi-
nary failures from juror to judge to attorney” that deprived
Sweeney of his right to be confronted with the witnesses
against him and his right to trial by an impartial jury. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 22a, 29a. That error, the Court of Appeals
concluded, entitled Sweeney to a new trial. Judge Quattle-
baum dissented, criticizing the majority for “flout[ing]” tra-
ditional principles of party presentation. Id., at 99a–103a.
                                II
  “In our adversarial system of adjudication, we follow the
principle of party presentation.” United States v. Sineneng-
Smith, 590 U. S. 371, 375 (2020). The parties “‘frame the
issues for decision,’ ” while the court serves as “ ‘neutral ar-
biter of matters the parties present.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Green-
law v. United States, 554 U. S. 237, 243 (2008)). To put it
                  Cite as: 607 U. S. ____ (2025)             3

                           Per Curiam

plainly, courts “call balls and strikes”; they don’t get a turn
at bat. Lomax v. Ortiz-Marquez, 590 U. S. 595, 599 (2020).
   The Fourth Circuit transgressed the party-presentation
principle by granting relief on a claim that Sweeney never
asserted and that the State never had the chance to ad-
dress. Sweeney asserted “one, and only one,” claim in his
federal habeas petition: that his counsel was ineffective for
failing to investigate whether other jurors had been preju-
diced by Juror 4’s crime-scene visit. App. to Pet. for Cert.
53a (Quattlebaum, J., dissenting). Instead of ruling on that
claim, the Fourth Circuit devised a new one, based on a
“combination of extraordinary failures from juror to judge
to attorney.” Id., at 22a. The Fourth Circuit’s “radical
transformation” of Sweeney’s simple ineffective-assistance
claim “departed so drastically from the principle of party
presentation as to constitute an abuse of discretion.”
Sineneng-Smith, 590 U. S., at 380, 375. We accordingly re-
verse the judgment of the Fourth Circuit and remand the
case for further proceedings.
   On remand, the Fourth Circuit should analyze the
ineffective-assistance claim that Sweeney asserted. Under
the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996,
relief is barred unless the state court’s decision was “con-
trary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly
established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme
Court of the United States.” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d). When
assessing a Strickland claim that a state court has already
adjudicated, the “analysis is ‘doubly deferential.’ ” Dunn v.
Reeves, 594 U. S. 731, 739 (2021) (per curiam) (quoting Burt
v. Titlow, 571 U. S. 12, 15 (2013)). “[A] federal court may
grant relief only if every ‘fairminded jurist’ would agree that
every reasonable lawyer would have made a different deci-
sion.” 594 U. S., at 739–740 (quoting Harrington v. Richter,
562 U. S. 86, 101 (2011)).
4                    CLARK v. SWEENEY

                         Per Curiam

  The petition for certiorari is granted, the judgment of the
Fourth Circuit is reversed, and the case is remanded for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
                                             It is so ordered.