Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)                     1

                      Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
            CHARLES C. MCCRORY v. ALABAMA
  ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF
             CRIMINAL APPEALS OF ALABAMA
                  No. 23–6232.    Decided July 2, 2024

   The petition for a writ of certiorari is denied.
   Statement of JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR respecting the denial
of certiorari.
   What should a court do when faced with a 40-year-old
conviction resting on science that has now been wholly dis-
credited? A court has a variety of tools to test the reliability
of forensic evidence introduced in criminal trials today. Yet
when a court must look backward, to convictions resting on
forensic evidence later repudiated by the scientific commu-
nity, those tools may fail.
   This petition raises difficult questions about the ade-
quacy of current postconviction remedies to correct a con-
viction secured by what we now know was faulty science.
One in four people exonerated since 1989 were wrongfully
convicted based on false or misleading forensic evidence in-
troduced at their trials. 1 Hundreds if not thousands of in-
nocent people may currently be incarcerated despite a mod-
ern consensus that the central piece of evidence at their
trials lacked any scientific basis.
   Petitioner Charles M. McCrory was convicted of murder
in 1985 based on forensic bitemark testimony that has now
been roundly condemned by the scientific community and
retracted by the expert who introduced it at his trial.
——————
  1 Since 1989, 3,545 people have been exonerated, meaning they were

wrongly convicted of a crime. See Nat’l Registry of Exonerations, https://
www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Pages / ExonerationsContrib
FactorsByCrime.aspx. Of these wrongful convictions, over 1,000 rested
in part on forensic evidence now known to have been false or misleading.
See ibid.
2                  MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                  Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

McCrory argues to this Court that this now-discredited fo-
rensic evidence rendered his trial fundamentally unfair in
violation of the Due Process Clause. Even if that were true,
McCrory faces many procedural hurdles that could delay or
even preclude relief based on existing state and federal
postconviction statutes. I vote to deny this petition because
due process claims like McCrory’s have yet to percolate suf-
ficiently through the federal courts. Legislatures concerned
with wrongful convictions based on faulty science, however,
need not wait for this Court to address a constitutional rem-
edy. Several States have already tackled this troubling
problem through targeted postconviction statutes. These
statutes create an efficient avenue for innocent people con-
victed based on forensic science that the scientific commu-
nity has now largely repudiated.
                                I
                                A
   The wholesale reevaluation of forensic evidence began in
2005, when Congress instructed the National Academy of
Sciences to investigate the state of forensic science. The
Academy responded four years later with a groundbreaking
314-page report that strongly suggested many forms of fo-
rensic evidence that previously had been accepted by courts
were, in fact, scientifically unsound. See National Research
Council, Strengthening Forensic Science in the United
States: A Path Forward (2009) (NAS Report). It found that
“no forensic method other than nuclear DNA analysis has
been rigorously shown to have the capacity to consistently
and with a high degree of certainty support conclusions . . .
‘matching’ . . . an unknown item of evidence to a specific
known source.” Id., at 87.
   The NAS Report singled out disciplines based on an ex-
pert’s subjective interpretation (as opposed to analysis in a
laboratory). Among those disciplines singled out for cri-
tique were bitemark analysis, microscopic hair analysis,
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)                     3

                      Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

fingerprint analysis, shoe print comparisons, toolmark and
firearms examination, and handwriting comparisons. 2 For
instance, the NAS Report found “no evidence of an existing
scientific basis for identifying an individual to the exclusion
of all others” via bitemark evidence, id., at 176, and “no sci-
entific support for the use of hair comparisons” to match a
sample to a suspect “in the absence of nuclear DNA,” id., at
161. It emphasized that courts failed meaningfully to test
the reliability of such evidence. Instead, they “ ‘routinely
affirm[ed] admissibility’ ” of even “ ‘the most vulnerable fo-
rensic sciences—hair microscopy, bite marks, and hand-
writing,’ ” relying on “ ‘earlier decisions rather than facts es-
tablished at a hearing.’ ” Id., at 107.
   Since the NAS Report, the scientific community has
shored up some methods of forensic evidence and left others
behind. For instance, a 2016 report to the President from
his Council of Advisors on Science and Technology evalu-
ated which of the methods critiqued in the NAS Report had,
after further efforts by the scientific community, become
“foundationally valid and reliable” enough for use in courts.
Forensic Science in Criminal Courts: Ensuring Scientific
Validity of Feature-Comparison Methods 67 (Sept. 2016)
(PCAST Report). For instance, the PCAST Report con-
cluded that “latent fingerprint analysis is a foundationally
valid subjective methodology” based on two recent studies,

——————
   2 The scientific community’s reevaluation of expert evidence is not lim-

ited to these types of forensic analysis. For example, there is now signif-
icant doubt in the medical community over the validity of “Shaken Baby
Syndrome,” or SBS, an expert diagnosis that formed the basis for con-
victing caregivers of murder when babies died suddenly under their care.
See, e.g., Cavazos v. Smith, 565 U. S. 1, 13 (2011) (Ginsburg, J., dissent-
ing) (collecting studies questioning the validity of SBS in one such case).
The National Registry of Exonerations includes over 30 cases where peo-
ple convicted of murder, manslaughter, or child abuse based partially on
evidence of SBS were later exonerated. See https://www.law.umich.edu/
special/exoneration/Pages/detaillist.aspx.
4                   MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                   Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

but emphasized that such evidence in court had to be “ac-
companied by accurate information about limitations on the
reliability of the conclusion.” Id., at 101; see id., at 148–
149. In contrast, it maintained that “bitemark analysis
does not meet the scientific standards for foundational va-
lidity, and is far from meeting such standards.” Id., at 87,
148. The PCAST Report found the “prospects of developing
bitemark analysis into a scientifically valid method to be
low.” Id., at 87.
                                B
   The facts of this petition illustrate some of the problems
for courts evaluating this evolving landscape of forensic ev-
idence. McCrory was convicted of killing his wife in 1985.
The State’s argument centered on the bitemark testimony
of celebrity forensic odontologist Dr. Richard Souviron, who
gained notoriety after his expert testimony helped secure
Ted Bundy’s conviction in 1979. Dr. Souviron testified that
alleged bitemarks on the victim had been made at or about
the time of death and were consistent with dental impres-
sions taken from McCrory. The jury convicted.
   In 2002, McCrory filed his first petition for state postcon-
viction review based in part on the unreliability of the
bitemark evidence. He cited a 2001 Newsweek article
where Dr. Souviron had stated that “ ‘You cannot make a
positive ID from a bitemark.’ ” Brief in Opposition 10. The
state court dismissed McCrory’s petition and he did not ap-
peal.
   In 2020, 35 years after his trial, McCrory filed a second
petition for state postconviction review. He argued that
“[n]ewly discovered material facts,” namely the scientific
consensus rejecting bitemark evidence, entitled him to a
new trial under Alabama’s postconviction scheme. Ala.
Rule Crim. Proc. 32.1(e) (2024). Dr. Souviron submitted an
affidavit stating that “[u]nder today’s scientific consensus
                     Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)                     5

                      Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

and the changes in the [American Board of Forensic Odon-
tology] Guidelines, it would be unreliable and scientifically
unsupported for me or any forensic odontologist to offer in-
dividualization testimony that Mr. McCrory was the source
of the teeth marks, as I testified in 1985. I therefore fully
recant my testimony that ‘these teeth marks [were] made
by Charles McCrory.’ ” 1 Record 38.
   The state postconviction court held an evidentiary hear-
ing. Two forensic dentists traveled to testify, without com-
pensation, because they both once believed that bitemark
evidence could be probative and now understood that it was
not. Both experts testified that, based on today’s scientific
understanding, the victim’s injury was “not a human bite
mark.” Tr. 34 (Apr. 28, 2021); id., at 81. In response, the
State introduced the trial transcript.
   The court denied McCrory’s petition for two reasons.
First, the court reasoned that because Dr. Souviron com-
plied with the standards in place at the time of the crime,
investigation, and trial, the new testimony by forensic den-
tists could be construed as impeachment testimony. Sec-
ond, the court held that there was enough circumstantial
evidence of McCrory’s guilt at trial outside of Dr. Souviron’s
testimony that the jury still would likely have convicted.
The court included the mold of McCrory’s teeth in this evi-
dence, reasoning that the jury could have made the physical
comparison from this mold to the mark on the victim’s arm
themselves. 3 The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals af-
firmed. 4
——————
  3 Alabama does not appear to defend the postconviction court’s materi-

ality analysis before this Court, instead pointing to other circumstantial
evidence to support the outcome. Indeed, it is difficult to see how
McCrory’s dental impressions could have been introduced absent any ex-
pert testimony on bitemark analysis.
  4 The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals granted McCrory’s motion

for rehearing after he raised the fact that Judge Kellum had authored
the State’s brief against him on direct appeal as assistant attorney gen-
eral in 1986. Judge Kellum recused herself from the case on rehearing
6                      MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                     Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

  McCrory has consistently maintained his innocence. He
rejected the State’s offer to plead to time served before the
evidentiary hearing on the bitemark testimony. Now,
McCrory asks this Court for relief.
                                II
   In his petition for certiorari, McCrory argues that the ex-
pert bitemark testimony at his trial, now fully recanted and
repudiated by the scientific community, rendered that trial
unconstitutional.       To the Alabama courts, however,
McCrory argued primarily that Alabama law entitled him
to relief under Alabama Rule of Criminal Procedure 32.1(e),
which permits courts to vacate convictions based on
“[n]ewly discovered material facts.” His constitutional
claim formed only a small part of his petition under Ala-
bama law’s separate provision that permits relief when the
“[c]onstitution of the United States or of the State of Ala-
bama requires a new trial.” Rule 32.1(a). Both the trial
court and the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals summar-
ily dismissed McCrory’s constitutional claim. McCrory does
not appear yet to have sought habeas review of his convic-
tion in federal court. Even with a case like McCrory’s, how-
ever, where the science underlying the expert evidence at
his trial has been fully repudiated by the scientific commu-
nity and fully recanted by the expert himself, ordinary state
and federal avenues for postconviction relief can present
significant barriers.
                             A
  Many States have postconviction statutes like Alabama’s
that allow relief based on “[n]ewly discovered material
facts.” Rule 32.1(e). Typically, however, these statutes
cover evidence that the defendant or his counsel could have
but did not know about at the time of trial. For instance,
——————
and the court published an opinion identical to its previous one, except
for noting her recusal.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)              7

                   Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Alabama’s statute requires that “[t]he facts relied upon
were not known by the petitioner or the petitioner’s counsel
at the time of trial or sentencing or in time to file a posttrial
motion . . . or in time to be included in any previous collat-
eral proceeding and could not have been discovered by any
of those times through the exercise of reasonable diligence.”
Rule 32.1(e)(1). Of course, counsel would have no way of
knowing that forensic evidence offered at the time of trial
would be discredited decades later. Yet defendants con-
victed based on forensic evidence that has now been firmly
discredited can still struggle to meet the requirements of
such statutes in three ways.
   First, because science evolves slowly rather than in con-
clusive bursts, it can be hard to pinpoint when someone
should have “discovered [newly-discrediting evidence]
through the exercise of reasonable diligence.” Ibid. Unlike
a murder weapon left in an abandoned warehouse, forensic
science does not lie around waiting for sudden discovery.
State postconviction schemes may also bar claims raised
previously, even if the repudiation of the relevant science
was in a more nascent stage. That can harm diligent de-
fendants who may have had previous postconviction peti-
tions denied when the expert testimony underlying their
conviction had merely been called into question, but not yet
conclusively repudiated by the scientific community. See A.
Maxfield & N. Sanghvi, Junk Statute: How Post-Conviction
Statutes Fail Petitioners Convicted Based on False or Mis-
leading Forensic Evidence, 75 Rutgers L. Rev. 1343, 1356–
1357 (2023) (detailing these challenges under Pennsylva-
nia’s postconviction review statute). For instance, McCrory
filed a petition in 2002 based on a statement from Dr. Sou-
viron in a 2001 Newsweek article several years before the
NAS Report and well before the scientific consensus repu-
diating bitemark testimony.
   Second, States may bar or discount new evidence that
merely calls into question the probative value of evidence
8                   MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                  Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

presented at trial. In McCrory’s case, both lower courts
held that the new evidence “merely amount[ed] to impeach-
ment evidence,” Rule 32.1(e)(3); in other words, it would
merely have given the jury reason to disbelieve the expert’s
evaluation of the evidence. Evidence that an entire mode
of forensic analysis has no scientific basis, however, is of a
different category from evidence that might call into ques-
tion a witness’s credibility or motive to testify. State post-
conviction statutes may not account for this difference.
   Third, newly-discredited forensic evidence is different
from other newly-discovered facts. Unlike a new witness to
a murder or a new analysis of DNA evidence, the new evi-
dence is simply a scientific consensus that the old evidence
was unreliable. In McCrory’s case, for example, it is not
that the dental mold was not of McCrory’s teeth or that the
victim had no marks on her arm. It is simply that a modern
scientist would be unable to testify that the two had any-
thing to do with each other. State courts, however, some-
times decline to find that changed science is new evidence
that requires a new trial. See J. Laurin, Criminal Law’s
Science Lag: How Criminal Justice Meets Changed Scien-
tific Understanding, 93 Texas L. Rev. 1751, 1763–1764, and
nn. 70–72 (2015) (collecting cases where state courts have
held that changed science evidence is merely cumulative of
other evidence or fails to point affirmatively to innocence).
   Even when there is no question that the current scientific
consensus would bar the admission of expert testimony in
a trial today, state courts may still struggle to apply exist-
ing postconviction statutes to provide relief.
                             B
  Modern trial courts have many tools to ensure the relia-
bility of expert forensic testimony. See, e.g., Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U. S. 579 (1993);
Smith v. Arizona, 602 U. S. ___ (2024). Many commenta-
                 Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)            9

                  Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

tors, however, have emphasized the challenges in remedy-
ing defects in state convictions through federal postconvic-
tion review after the passage of the Antiterrorism and Ef-
fective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA). See, e.g., L.
Kovarsky, Structural Change in State Postconviction Re-
view, 93 Notre Dame L. Rev. 443, 461–465 (2017) (catalog-
ing how AEDPA shifts primary responsibility for error cor-
rection from federal to state postconviction proceedings).
AEDPA’s overwhelming concern with the finality of crimi-
nal convictions sits uneasily with modern scientific devel-
opments that call those convictions into question.
   Even beyond these structural barriers to federal postcon-
viction review, prisoners may face substantive challenges
with how to fit newly-discredited science into existing con-
stitutional doctrines. See, e.g., C. Plummer & I. Syed, Crim-
inal Procedure v. Scientific Progress: The Challenging Path
to Post-Conviction Relief in Cases That Arise During Peri-
ods of Shifts in Science, 41 Vt. L. Rev. 279, 287 (2016) (de-
scribing why someone whose conviction relied on discred-
ited forensic testimony “may well be considered
indisputably innocent by today’s standards, but have no ap-
parent legal avenue for relief ”). McCrory’s constitutional
argument formed only a small part of his submissions to the
Alabama courts and has yet to be passed on by a federal
court. In this Court, he argues that a conviction “based on
expert testimony that later is completely eliminated from
the case” renders the underlying trial fundamentally unfair
under the Due Process Clause. Pet. for Cert. 26. This Court
has held that “a conviction obtained through use of false ev-
idence, known to be such by representatives of the State,
must fall under the Fourteenth Amendment.” Napue v. Il-
linois, 360 U. S. 264, 269 (1959); see also Escobar v. Texas,
598 U. S. ___ (2023) (vacating and remanding based on
Texas’s confession of error about a faulty crime laboratory).
With newly-discredited expert evidence, however, nobody
knew that the evidence was faulty at the time of the trial.
10                     MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                      Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Similarly, it is hard to argue that trial counsel was ineffec-
tive for failing to object to science that was discredited only
decades after the initial trial.
   Of course, none of this prevents federal courts from hold-
ing that the lack of any direct evidence of a defendant’s guilt
aside from discredited expert testimony rendered a trial
fundamentally unfair. See Spencer v. Texas, 385 U. S. 554,
563–564 (1967) (“[T]he Due Process Clause guarantees the
fundamental elements of fairness in a criminal trial”);
Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U. S. 284, 302 (1973) (holding
that “the exclusion of . . . critical evidence . . . denied [the
defendant] a trial in accord with traditional and fundamen-
tal standards of due process”); see also, e.g., Han Tak Lee v.
Houtzdale SCI, 798 F. 3d 159, 169 (CA3 2015) (affirming
grant of habeas relief after State failed to point to “ ‘ample
evidence’ ” sufficient to prove guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt after excluding discredited fire-science evidence);
Gimenez v. Ochoa, 821 F. 3d 1136, 1145 (CA9 2016) (recog-
nizing “that habeas petitioners can allege a constitutional
violation from the introduction of flawed expert testimony
at trial if they show that the introduction of this evidence
‘undermined the fundamental fairness of the entire trial’ ”).
Although AEDPA review can be a backstop on the constitu-
tional rights of criminal defendants, legislatures remain
free to address this known flaw with decades-old convic-
tions more directly.
                            III
  Rather than waiting for this Court to address discredited
forensic evidence testimony via constitutional law, Con-
gress and state legislatures can more efficiently address
this known problem in the first instance. Indeed, at least
six States have already taken action. 5
——————
  5 See Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Art. 11.073 (Vernon 2015); Cal. Penal

Code Ann. §1473(e)(1) (West 2023); Conn. Gen. Stat. §52–582 (2018);
Wyo. Stat. Ann. §7–12–402(a)(iv) (2018); Mich. Ct. Rule 6.502(G)(2)–(3)
                     Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)        11

                      Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

   Texas led the way in forensic science reform in criminal
procedure. In 2013, Texas passed the first statute that al-
lowed prisoners to challenge wrongful convictions by show-
ing that changes in forensic science seriously undermined
the integrity of their criminal trials. Article 11.073 applies
to “relevant scientific evidence that . . . contradicts scien-
tific evidence relied on by the state at trial.” Art.
11.073(a)(2). If a court finds that such scientific evidence
was not available at the time of the trial, would have been
admissible, and, if presented at trial, “on the preponderance
of the evidence” would have changed the outcome, it can
grant relief. Art. 11.073(b)(2).
   In 2018, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals applied the
new statute to bitemark evidence from Steven Chaney’s
1987 murder trial. State experts at Chaney’s trial had tes-
tified that a mark on one victim’s arm was a “ ‘match’ ” to
Chaney. Ex parte Chaney, 563 S. W. 3d 239, 260. The court
held that the “body of scientific knowledge underlying the
field of bitemark comparisons has evolved since [Chaney’s]
trial in a way that contradicts the scientific evidence relied
on by the State at trial.” Ibid. “New peer-reviewed studies
discredit[ed] nearly all the testimony” about the mark “be-
ing a ‘match,’ ” and the American Board of Forensic Odon-
tology “has completely disavowed individualization (i.e.,
that Chaney was a ‘match’), which the State heavily relied
upon at Chaney’s trial.” Id., at 260–261. The court con-
cluded that the bitemark evidence was the “linchpin of the
State’s case”; its “remaining evidence was circumstantial
and weak.” Id., at 262. Chaney had therefore “shown by a
preponderance of the evidence that he would not have been
found guilty if the newly available and relevant scientific
evidence he now relies upon had been presented at his 1987
trial.” Id., at 263.
   California has followed a similar trajectory. In 2014, it
——————
(2023); Nev. Rev. Stat. §34.930(3) (2019).
12                    MCCRORY v. ALABAMA

                     Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

revised its postconviction statute’s definition of “false evi-
dence” to “includ[e] opinions of experts that have either
been repudiated by the expert who originally provided the
opinion at a hearing or trial or that have been undermined
by the state of scientific knowledge or later scientific re-
search or technological advances.” Cal. Penal Code Ann.
§1473(e)(1) (West 2023). 6 In 2016, the California Supreme
Court applied the revised statute to bitemark testimony
from William Richards’ 1997 trial for the murder of his wife.
The court had previously denied Richards’ postconviction
challenge based on the expert’s recantation of his bitemark
testimony under the then-extant “false evidence” statute.
See In re Richards, 55 Cal. 4th 948, 289 P. 3d 860 (2012).
Under the new definition in California’s postconviction
statute, however, the court concluded that the bitemark ev-
idence was now “false evidence” that could form the basis of
postconviction relief. In re Richards, 63 Cal. 4th 291, 311,
371 P. 3d 195, 209 (2016). Concluding that, “with the ex-
ception of the bite mark evidence, the defense had a sub-
stantial response to much of the prosecution’s evidence” and
it was therefore “reasonably probable that the false evi-
dence presented by [the expert] at [Richards’] 1997 jury
trial affected the outcome of that proceeding,” the court
granted Richards relief. Id., at 315, 371 P. 3d, at 211.
   These cases in Texas and California show how targeted
legislative reform can allow courts to address convictions
based on trial evidence that has been repudiated by the sci-
entific community. Legislators enabled these courts explic-
itly to consider changes in forensic science on collateral re-
view of criminal convictions. “The adoption of these
changed science writs empowers courts in state habeas pro-
ceedings to reverse wrongful convictions, rather than be
hindered by procedure.” V. Beety, Changed Science Writs
——————
  6 This provision is now codified elsewhere in section §1473. See Cal.

Penal Code Ann. §1473(b)(2) (West 2024).
                 Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024)           13

                  Statement of SOTOMAYOR, J.

and State Habeas Relief, 57 Hous. L. Rev. 483, 531 (2020).
As a result, innocent people can attain freedom sooner.
                        *     *     *
  I vote to deny this petition because the constitutional
question McCrory raises has not yet percolated sufficiently
in the lower courts to merit this Court’s review. There is no
reason, however, for state legislatures or Congress to wait
for this Court before addressing wrongful convictions that
rest on repudiated forensic testimony.