PRELIMINARY PRINT

             Volume 601 U. S. Part 1
                              Pages 87–99




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                    OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                             February 21, 2024


Page Proof Pending Publication


                   REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D.C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2023                               87

                                 Syllabus


                    McELRATH v. GEORGIA

      certiorari to the supreme court of georgia
 No. 22–721. Argued November 28, 2023—Decided February 21, 2024
After petitioner Damian McElrath killed his mother, the State of Georgia
  charged him with three crimes related to her death: malice murder,
  felony murder, and aggravated assault. At trial, the jury returned a
  split verdict against McElrath: “not guilty by reason of insanity” with
  respect to malice-murder, and “guilty but mentally ill” as to the other
  counts. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Georgia determined that the
  jury's “guilty but mentally ill” verdict for felony murder was “repug-
  nant” to the jury's “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict for malice
  murder under Georgia law, because the verdicts “required affrmative
  fndings of different mental states that could not exist at the same time.”
  See 308 Ga. 104, 112, 839 S. E. 2d 573, 579. The court vacated both
  the malice-murder and felony-murder verdicts pursuant to Georgia's so-
  called repugnancy doctrine, and authorized retrial. Ibid., 839 S. E. 2d,
  at 580. On remand, McElrath argued that the Double Jeopardy Clause
Page Proof Pending Publication
  of the Fifth Amendment prohibited Georgia from retrying him for mal-
  ice murder given the jury's prior “not guilty by reason of insanity” ver-
  dict on that charge. The Georgia courts rejected that argument.
Held: The jury's verdict that McElrath was not guilty of malice murder
 by reason of insanity constituted an acquittal for double jeopardy pur-
 poses notwithstanding any inconsistency with the jury's other verdicts.
 Pp. 93–98.
    (a) The Double Jeopardy Clause provides that “[n]o person shall . . .
 be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or
 limb.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 5. “[I]t has long been settled under the
 Fifth Amendment that a verdict of acquittal is fnal, ending a defend-
 ant's jeopardy, and . . . is a bar to a subsequent prosecution for the same
 offence.” Green v. United States, 355 U. S. 184, 188 (internal quotation
 marks omitted). The Court's “cases have defned an acquittal to encom-
 pass any ruling that the prosecution's proof is insuffcient to establish
 criminal liability for an offense.” Evans v. Michigan, 568 U. S. 313,
 318. Once rendered, a jury's verdict of acquittal is inviolate. The prin-
 ciple “that `[a] verdict of acquittal . . . could not be reviewed, on error
 or otherwise,' ” is “[p]erhaps the most fundamental rule in the history
 of double jeopardy jurisprudence.” United States v. Martin Linen
 Supply Co., 430 U. S. 564, 571. Whatever the basis for a jury's verdict,
 see Bravo-Fernandez v. United States, 580 U. S. 5, 10, the Double Jeop-
88                      McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                                  Syllabus

  ardy Clause prohibits second-guessing the reason for a jury's acquittal.
  Pp. 93–95.
     (b) Georgia law specifcally provides that a defendant who establishes
  an insanity defense “shall not be found guilty of [the] crime.” Ga. Code
  Ann. §§ 16–3–2, 16–3–3. Here, the jury concluded that McElrath was
  not guilty by reason of insanity with respect to the malice-murder
  charge. That verdict was unquestionably a “ruling that the prosecu-
  tion's proof is insuffcient to establish criminal liability for an offense,”
  Evans, 568 U. S., at 318, and thus an acquittal.
     Georgia argues that there was no valid verdict pursuant to Georgia
  law, and thus no acquittal. But whether an acquittal has occurred for
  double jeopardy purposes is a question of federal law, and a State's char-
  acterization of a ruling is not binding on the Court. Smalis v. Pennsyl-
  vania, 476 U. S. 140, 144, n. 5. While States have the power “to regu-
  late procedures under which [their] laws are carried out,” Patterson v.
  New York, 432 U. S. 197, 201, the ultimate question remains whether the
  Double Jeopardy Clause recognizes an event as an acquittal. The jury's
  verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity here constituted such a deter-
  mination, and it is of no moment that the verdict was accompanied by
  other verdicts appearing to rest on inconsistent fndings. An acquittal
  is an acquittal, even when a jury returns inconsistent verdicts. Bravo-
Page Proof Pending Publication
  Fernandez, 580 U. S., at 8. Georgia argues that the bar to second-
  guessing an acquittal applies only to general verdicts, but the Court's
  cases prohibit any speculation about the reasons for a jury's verdict of
  acquittal—even when, as here, specifc jury fndings provide a factual
  basis for such speculation. To do otherwise “would impermissibly au-
  thorize judges to usurp the jury right.” Smith v. United States, 599
  U. S. 236, 252. Pp. 95–98.
315 Ga. 126, 880 S. E. 2d 518, reversed and remanded.

  Jackson, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. Alito, J.,
fled a concurring opinion, post, p. 98.

  Richard A. Simpson argued the cause for petitioner.
With him on the briefs were F. Andrew Hessick, H. Maddox
Kilgore, and Carlos J. Rodriguez.
  Stephen J. Petrany, Solicitor General of Georgia, argued
the cause for respondent. With him on the brief were
Christopher M. Carr, Attorney General, Ross W. Bergethon,
Principal Deputy Solicitor General, and Justin T. Golart,
                       Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)                    89

                          Opinion of the Court

James E. Barrett, and Paul R. Draper, Deputy Solicitors
General.*
  Justice Jackson delivered the opinion of the Court.
  Under Georgia law, a jury's verdict in a criminal case can
be set aside if it is “repugnant”—meaning that it involves
“affrmative fndings by the jury that are not legally and logi-
cally possible of existing simultaneously.” 308 Ga. 104, 112,
839 S. E. 2d 573, 579 (2020). In this case, a jury found that
petitioner Damian McElrath was “not guilty by reason of
insanity” with respect to a malice-murder count, but was
“guilty but mentally ill” regarding two other counts—felony
murder and aggravated assault—all of which pertained to
the same underlying homicide. Invoking the repugnancy
doctrine, Georgia courts nullifed both the “not guilty” and
“guilty” verdicts, and authorized McElrath's retrial.
  McElrath now maintains that the Fifth Amendment's Dou-
ble Jeopardy Clause prevents the State from retrying him
Page Proof Pending Publication
for the crime that had resulted in the “not guilty by reason
of insanity” fnding. Under the circumstances presented
here, we agree. The jury's verdict constituted an acquittal

   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for the Georgia Asso-
ciation of Criminal Defense Lawyers by Greg Willis and V. Natasha Per-
dew Silas; and for the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
et al. by Carmen Iguina González, Sean Hecker, David Oscar Markus,
David D. Cole, and Brandon Buskey.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance were fled for the State of
Missouri et al. by Andrew Bailey, Attorney General of Missouri, Joshua
M. Divine, Solicitor General, Peter F. Donohue, Sr., Assistant Attorney
General, and Gregory M. Goodwin, and by the Attorneys General for their
respective States as follows: Steve Marshall of Alabama, Tim Griffn of
Arkansas, Raúl R. Labrador of Idaho, Brenna Bird of Iowa, Kris W. Ko-
bach of Kansas, Jeff Landry of Louisiana, Lynn Fitch of Mississippi, Aus-
tin Knudsen of Montana, Michael T. Hilgers of Nebraska, Drew H. Wrig-
ley of North Dakota, Alan Wilson of South Carolina, Jonathan Skrmetti
of Tennessee, Ken Paxton of Texas, and Sean D. Reyes of Utah; and for
the District Attorneys' Association of Georgia by Robert W. Smith, Jr.
90                 McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                      Opinion of the Court

for double jeopardy purposes, and an acquittal is an acquittal
notwithstanding its apparent inconsistency with other ver-
dicts that the jury may have rendered.

                               I
                              A
   This case begins with tragedy. In 2012, petitioner Dam-
ian McElrath, then 18 years old, killed his mother Diane.
Diane, a single parent who had adopted McElrath when he
was two years old, struggled for years with caring for him.
At a young age, McElrath was diagnosed with bipolar
disorder and attention defcit hyperactivity disorder. He re-
sponded poorly to psychiatric treatment and sometimes re-
fused to take his prescribed medication. He had trouble in
school, including suspensions and low grades, and experi-
enced several run-ins with law enforcement. These issues,
among others, led to quarrels between McElrath and his
Page Proof Pending Publication
mother.
   A few years before Diane's murder, McElrath's mental
health began to deteriorate substantially, eventually mani-
festing in his belief that Diane was poisoning his food
and drink with ammonia and pesticides. At some point,
McElrath began to exhibit other delusions, such as a belief
that he was an FBI agent who regularly traveled to Russia
and had killed multiple people. These delusions intensifed
to the point that, just a few weeks before the events giving
rise to this case, McElrath was committed to a mental-health
facility, where he was diagnosed with schizophrenia. After
two weeks of hospitalization, clinical staff believed that
McElrath was no longer a threat to himself or others and
that there was no evidence of further delusions. Thus,
McElrath was discharged.
   One week later, McElrath stabbed Diane to death. Imme-
diately after the stabbing, McElrath composed a note in
which he explained that he had killed Diane because she had
been poisoning him and that she had in fact confessed to
                      Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)                   91

                         Opinion of the Court

doing so. McElrath then called 911; he told the dispatch of-
fcer that he had killed his mother and asked if his actions
were wrong. After law enforcement arrived at the scene,
McElrath was taken to a police station for interrogation,
where he told the investigator, “I killed my Mom because she
poisoned me.” 308 Ga., at 105, 839 S. E. 2d, at 575 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
                              B
   Georgia charged McElrath with three crimes stemming
from Diane's death: malice murder, felony murder, and ag-
gravated assault. At trial, McElrath did not dispute that he
killed Diane but asserted an insanity defense.
   Under Georgia law, a jury may fnd a criminal defendant
“not guilty by reason of insanity” if, at the time of the crime,
he “did not have mental capacity to distinguish between
right and wrong” or he committed the crime “because of a
delusional compulsion as to such act which overmastered his
Page Proof Pending Publication
will to resist committing the crime.” Ga. Code Ann. §§ 16–
3–2, 16–3–3, 17–7–131(c)(1) (2019). Such a verdict results in
the defendant's commitment to a state mental-health facility
until a court determines that release is appropriate. § 17–7–
131(d). Even if a defendant fails to prove an insanity de-
fense, a Georgia jury may still render a verdict of “guilty but
mentally ill,” under which the State Department of Correc-
tions may, at its discretion, refer a defendant for temporary
mental-health treatment. §§ 17–7–131(c)(2), (g).
   The jury returned a split verdict against McElrath. It
found him not guilty by reason of insanity on the malice-
murder charge and guilty but mentally ill on the felony-
murder and aggravated-assault charges. The trial court ac-
cepted the jury's verdict, and eventually sentenced McElrath
to life imprisonment based on the felony-murder conviction.1
  1
    The aggravated-assault conviction merged into the felony-murder con-
viction because, under Georgia law, it served as a predicate for felony
murder. See Culpepper v. State, 289 Ga. 736, 737, 715 S. E. 2d 155, 157
(2011).
92                      McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                           Opinion of the Court

   McElrath appealed. He argued that the felony-murder
conviction should be vacated because the guilty-but-
mentally-ill verdict for that crime was “repugnant” to the
jury's “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict for malice
murder. See 308 Ga., at 112, 839 S. E. 2d, at 579 (explaining
that, under Georgia's so-called “repugnancy” doctrine, a
state court may set aside a verdict as repugnant when there
are “affrmative fndings by the jury that are not legally and
logically possible of existing simultaneously”).
   The Supreme Court of Georgia agreed with McElrath that
the verdicts were repugnant under Georgia law.2 As the
court explained, “the not guilty by reason of insanity verdict
on malice murder and the guilty but mentally ill verdict on
felony murder based on aggravated assault required affrm-
ative fndings of different mental states that could not exist
at the same time during the commission of those crimes as
they were indicted, proved, and charged to the jury.” Ibid.
There was no way to reconcile those verdicts because, as the
Page Proof Pending Publication
court noted, the jury could not conclude “that the crimes
occurred at different times or through distinct acts.” Ibid.,
n. 15, 839 S. E. 2d, at 579, n. 15. But instead of vacating
only the felony-murder conviction, as McElrath had re-
quested, the State Supreme Court vacated both the malice-
murder and felony-murder verdicts. Id., at 112, 839 S. E.
2d, at 580.3

   2
     McElrath appealed directly to the Supreme Court of Georgia, which
has appellate jurisdiction over all murder cases. See Ga. Const., Art. VI,
§ 6, ¶3; see also Neal v. State, 290 Ga. 563, 567, 722 S. E. 2d 765, 770
(2012) (Hunstein, C. J., concurring) (noting that the Georgia Constitution
provides the State Supreme Court with “jurisdiction to decide direct ap-
peals in life-imprisonment murder cases”).
   3
     Georgia represents that, outside of this case, the Georgia Supreme
Court has applied the repugnancy rule only once, in Turner v. State, 283
Ga. 17, 655 S. E. 2d 589 (2008). See Brief in Opposition 15. In contrast
with McElrath's case, the court in Turner vacated only the guilty verdicts,
leaving the jury's verdict of acquittal intact. See 283 Ga., at 21, 655 S. E.
2d, at 592.
                   Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)              93

                      Opinion of the Court

   On remand, McElrath argued that the Double Jeopardy
Clause of the Fifth Amendment prohibited Georgia from re-
trying him for malice murder in light of the jury's prior “not
guilty by reason of insanity” verdict on that charge. The
trial court rejected this argument, and McElrath again
appealed.
   The Supreme Court of Georgia affrmed. 315 Ga. 126, 880
S. E. 2d 518 (2022). The court recognized that, “[u]nder the
general principles of double jeopardy,” the verdict of not
guilty by reason of insanity “would appear to be an acquittal
that precludes retrial, as not guilty verdicts are generally
inviolate.” Id., at 130, 880 S. E. 2d, at 521. But the court
concluded that the acquittal at issue in this case “los[t] con-
siderable steam” when considered alongside the verdict of
guilty but mentally ill, and because the verdicts were repug-
nant, “both [were] rendered valueless.” Ibid. In the
court's view, repugnant verdicts were no different for double
jeopardy purposes from “a situation in which a mistrial is
Page Proof Pending Publication
declared after a jury is unable to reach a verdict.” Ibid.,
880 S. E. 2d, at 522.
   Justice Pinson concurred, noting that he could not “quite
shake the doubt” that the court's ruling was inconsistent
“with the quite-absolute-sounding bar against retrying a de-
fendant who has secured an acquittal verdict.” Id., at 132,
880 S. E. 2d, at 523. He joined the majority, however, be-
cause “[t]his lingering doubt [was] not enough to justify dis-
senting from an otherwise unanimous Court.” Id., at 133,
880 S. E. 2d, at 523.
   We granted certiorari. 600 U. S. ––– (2023).

                               II
  The Double Jeopardy Clause provides that “[n]o person
shall . . . be subject for the same offence to be twice put in
jeopardy of life or limb.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 5. The “con-
trolling constitutional principle” of the Clause “focuses on
prohibitions against multiple trials.” United States v. Mar-
94                 McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                      Opinion of the Court

tin Linen Supply Co., 430 U. S. 564, 569 (1977) (internal quo-
tation marks omitted). “[I]t has long been settled under the
Fifth Amendment that a verdict of acquittal is fnal, ending
a defendant's jeopardy, and . . . is a bar to a subsequent
prosecution for the same offence.” Green v. United States,
355 U. S. 184, 188 (1957) (internal quotation marks omitted).
   What, then, is an acquittal? “[O]ur cases have defned an
acquittal to encompass any ruling that the prosecution's
proof is insuffcient to establish criminal liability for an of-
fense.” Evans v. Michigan, 568 U. S. 313, 318 (2013).
“[L]abels do not control our analysis in this context; rather,
the substance of [the ruling] does.” Id., at 322. In particu-
lar, we look to whether the ruling's substance “relate[s] to
the ultimate question of guilt or innocence.” United States
v. Scott, 437 U. S. 82, 98, n. 11 (1978) (internal quotation
marks omitted).
   Once rendered, a jury's verdict of acquittal is inviolate.
Page Proof Pending Publication
We have described this principle—“that `[a] verdict of acquit-
tal . . . could not be reviewed, on error or otherwise' ”—as
“[p]erhaps the most fundamental rule in the history of double
jeopardy jurisprudence.” Martin Linen, 430 U. S., at 571.
This bright-line rule exists to preserve the jury's “overriding
responsibility . . . to stand between the accused and a poten-
tially arbitrary or abusive Government that is in command
of the criminal sanction.” Id., at 572.
   We have long recognized that, while an acquittal might
refect a jury's determination that the defendant is innocent
of the crime charged, such a verdict might also be “the result
of compromise, compassion, lenity, or misunderstanding of
the governing law.” Bravo-Fernandez v. United States, 580
U. S. 5, 10 (2016); see also United States v. Powell, 469
U. S. 57, 65 (1984). Whatever the basis, the Double Jeop-
ardy Clause prohibits second-guessing the reason for a jury's
acquittal. As a result, “the jury holds an unreview-
able power to return a verdict of not guilty even for
impermissible reasons.” Smith v. United States, 599 U. S.
                    Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)              95

                       Opinion of the Court

236, 253 (2023) (internal quotation marks and alterations
omitted).
  For double jeopardy purposes, a jury's determination that
a defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity is a conclusion
that “criminal culpability had not been established,” just as
much as any other form of acquittal. Burks v. United
States, 437 U. S. 1, 10 (1978). Such a verdict refects “that
the Government ha[s] failed to come forward with suffcient
proof of [a defendant's] capacity to be responsible for criminal
acts.” Ibid.
                               III
   Georgia law specifcally provides that a defendant who es-
tablishes an insanity defense “shall not be found guilty of
[the] crime.” Ga. Code Ann. §§ 16–3–2, 16–3–3. Here,
after being instructed on Georgia's insanity defense, see
App. 89a–92a, the jury concluded that McElrath was not
guilty by reason of insanity with respect to the malice-
Page Proof Pending Publication
murder charge. That jury determination was unquestion-
ably a “ruling that the prosecution's proof is insuffcient to
establish criminal liability for an offense.” Evans, 568 U. S.,
at 318; see also Burks, 437 U. S., at 10.
   This conclusion is consistent with Georgia's concession that
if the “not guilty” verdict were considered in isolation—that
is, if the jury had reached the same conclusion under the
same circumstances on a single count—it would have consti-
tuted a valid verdict of acquittal under state law. See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 31–32. As we have long recognized, jeopardy
clearly terminates under these circumstances. See United
States v. Ball, 163 U. S. 662, 671 (1896); see also 6 W. LaFave,
J. Israel, N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure § 25.3(b),
p. 821 (4th ed. 2015) (describing this principle as “the corner-
stone of double jeopardy jurisprudence”).
   In resisting this straightforward conclusion, the State reit-
erates the Georgia Supreme Court's holding that, because
the “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict was repugnant
to the jury's other verdicts, all the verdicts the jury rendered
96                      McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                            Opinion of the Court

in McElrath's case were “a nullity and should not have been
accepted by the trial court.” 315 Ga., at 127, 880 S. E. 2d, at
520. Georgia thus maintains that, because no verdict under
state law issued, no acquittal took place.
   We cannot agree. To start, it is well established that
whether an acquittal has occurred for purposes of the Double
Jeopardy Clause is a question of federal, not state, law.
Again, an acquittal occurs when there has been a ruling “re-
lat[ing] to the ultimate question of guilt or innocence.”
Scott, 437 U. S., at 98, n. 11 (internal quotation marks
omitted). And “labels”—including those provided by state
law—“do not control our analysis in this context.” Evans,
568 U. S., at 322. Thus, it is not dispositive whether a fact-
fnder “incanted the word `acquit' ”; instead, an acquittal has
occurred if the factfnder “acted on its view that the prosecu-
tion had failed to prove its case.” Id., at 325. Because of
this focus on substance over labels, a State's “characteriza-
tion, as a matter of double jeopardy law, of [a ruling] is not
Page Proof Pending Publication
binding on us.” Smalis v. Pennsylvania, 476 U. S. 140, 144,
n. 5 (1986); see also Smith v. Massachusetts, 543 U. S. 462,
468–469 (2005).
   To be sure, “[t]he States possess primary authority for de-
fning and enforcing the criminal law,” Engle v. Isaac, 456
U. S. 107, 128 (1982)—a power that permits States “to regu-
late procedures under which [their] laws are carried out,”
Patterson v. New York, 432 U. S. 197, 201 (1977). But the
ultimate question is whether the Double Jeopardy Clause
recognizes an event as an acquittal. In making that deter-
mination, we ask whether—given the operation of state
law—there has been “any ruling that the prosecution's proof
is insuffcient to establish criminal liability for an offense.”
Evans, 568 U. S., at 318. Here, for the reasons already dis-
cussed, the jury's verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity
constituted such a determination.4
  4
    We need not, and do not, address the Double Jeopardy Clause's applica-
tion to a trial judge's rejection of inconsistent or incomprehensible jury fnd-
ings under state law. Cf. Brief for State of Missouri et al. as Amici Curiae
                       Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)                    97

                          Opinion of the Court

   That McElrath's “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict
was accompanied by other verdicts that appeared to rest
on inconsistent fndings is of no moment. As we have
explained, the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits second-
guessing an acquittal for any reason. See Martin Linen,
430 U. S., at 571. An acquittal is an acquittal, even “when a
jury returns inconsistent verdicts, convicting on one count
and acquitting on another count, where both counts turn on
the very same issue of ultimate fact.” Bravo-Fernandez,
580 U. S., at 8. As far as the Fifth Amendment is concerned,
“[i]nconsistency in a verdict is not a suffcient reason for set-
ting it aside.” Harris v. Rivera, 454 U. S. 339, 345 (1981)
(per curiam).
   Georgia contends that this bar to second-guessing an ac-
quittal applies only to general verdicts of acquittal, because
in evaluating a general verdict, there is no way to ascertain
the true basis of the jury's decision. Here, by contrast, the
Page Proof Pending Publication
jury based its verdicts on specifc “affrmative fndings of dif-
ferent mental states that could not exist at the same time.”
308 Ga., at 112, 839 S. E. 2d, at 579. Georgia maintains that,
under the State's repugnancy doctrine, such “special fnd-
ings” allow for an informed review (and potential nullifca-
tion) of inconsistent jury verdicts, including a verdict of
acquittal. Brief for Respondent 39.
   Georgia is mistaken. Once there has been an acquittal,
our cases prohibit any speculation about the reasons for a
jury's verdict—even when there are specifc jury fndings
that provide a factual basis for such speculation—“because
it is impossible for a court to be certain about the ground
for the verdict without improperly delving into the jurors'
deliberations.” Smith, 599 U. S., at 252–253. We simply
cannot know why the jury in McElrath's case acted as it did,
and the Double Jeopardy Clause forbids us to guess. “To

7–8. What is at issue here is Georgia's claim that, when a not-guilty ver-
dict on one count is inconsistent with a guilty verdict on another count,
double jeopardy poses no barrier to retrial on the former.
98                     McELRATH v. GEORGIA

                          Alito, J., concurring

conclude otherwise would impermissibly authorize judges to
usurp the jury right.” Id., at 252.
                             *     *      *
  The jury's verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity on
the malice-murder charge was an acquittal for purposes of
the Double Jeopardy Clause. The Clause therefore bars
retrial of McElrath on that charge.5 The judgment of the
Supreme Court of Georgia is reversed, and the case is re-
manded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this
opinion.
                                           It is so ordered.
   Justice Alito, concurring.
   I join the opinion of the Court but write to clarify my
understanding of what we have held. In this case, there
was indisputably an acquittal on the malice-murder charge.
The jury returned a not-guilty verdict on that count, the trial
Page Proof Pending Publication
judge entered a judgment of acquittal on that count, and
petitioner appealed that part of the judgment. Because the
Constitution does not permit appellate review of an acquit-
tal, the State Supreme Court's decision must be reversed.
As I understand it, our holding extends no further.
   As the Court recognizes, the situation here is different
from one in which a trial judge refuses to accept inconsistent
verdicts and thus sends the jury back to deliberate further.
Some States follow this practice, and our decision does not
address it. We have held that federal law does not prevent
the acceptance of inconsistent verdicts, United States v. Pow-
ell, 469 U. S. 57, 68–69 (1984); Dunn v. United States, 284
U. S. 390, 393–394 (1932), but we have never held that the
Constitution mandates that practice—which is not necessar-
ily favorable to either the prosecution or the defense. Noth-
  5
   On remand, the Georgia courts may address as a matter of state law
the status of McElrath's vacated conviction for felony murder. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 64–67.
                   Cite as: 601 U. S. 87 (2024)           99

                      Alito, J., concurring

ing that we say today should be understood to express any
view about whether a not-guilty verdict that is inconsistent
with a verdict on another count and is not accepted by the
trial judge constitutes an “acquittal” for double jeopardy
purposes.




Page Proof Pending Publication
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
Page Proof Pending Publication
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

None